<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 October 31–November 6</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016372.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:1-26:28)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A good name* is to be chosen rather than great wealth; To be respected* is better than silver and gold.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The rich and the poor have this in common:* Jehovah made them both.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah Is riches and glory and life.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path, But whoever values his life* keeps far away from them.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Train a boy* in the way he should go; Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The rich one rules the poor, And the borrower is a slave to the lender.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster, And the rod of his fury will come to its end.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The generous person* will be blessed, For he shares his food with the poor. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Drive away the scornful man, And contention will disappear; Disputes* and insults will cease. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is gracious Will have the king as his friend. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge, But He overturns the words of the treacherous. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the middle of the public square!” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The mouth of wayward* women is a deep pit. The one condemned by Jehovah will fall into it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,* But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealth And the one giving gifts to the rich Will end up in poverty. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise, In order to apply your heart to my knowledge, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you, So that all of them may constantly be on your lips. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For your confidence to be in Jehovah, I am giving you knowledge today. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Have I not already written you, Imparting advice and knowledge, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>To teach you true and reliable words, So that you can return with an accurate report to the one who sent you? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Do not rob the poor man because he is poor, And do not crush the lowly man in the city gate, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For Jehovah himself will plead their cause And he will take the life* of those who defraud them. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man Or get involved with one disposed to rage, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So that you never learn his ways And ensnare yourself.* <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Do not be among those who shake hands in a pledge, Who put up security for loans. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>If you have nothing to pay, Your bed will be taken right out from under you! <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not move an ancient boundary marker That your forefathers put in place. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Have you seen a man skillful at his work? He will stand before kings; He will not stand before common men. </p><p><strong>23 </strong>When you sit down to eat with a king, Carefully consider what is before you;  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Put a knife to your throat* If you have a large appetite.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not crave his delicacies, For it is deceptive food.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth. Stop and show understanding.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there, For it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not eat the food of a stingy person;* Do not crave his delicacies,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For he is like one keeping accounts.* “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but he does not mean it.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You will vomit up the morsels you have eaten And will have wasted your compliments.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not speak in the ears of the stupid one, For he will despise the wisdom of your words. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Do not move an ancient boundary marker Or encroach on the field of the fatherless. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For their Defender* is strong; He will take up their cause against you. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Apply your heart to discipline And your ear to the sayings of knowledge. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Do not hold back discipline from a boy.* If you strike him with the rod, he will not die. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With the rod you should strike him, In order to save him* from the Grave.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My son, if your heart becomes wise, Then my own heart will rejoice. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>My innermost being* will find joy When your lips speak what is right. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let your heart not envy sinners, But be in the fear of Jehovah all day long, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For then you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Listen, my son, and become wise, And direct your heart in the right way. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Do not be among those who drink too much wine, Among those who gorge themselves on meat, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty, And drowsiness will clothe one with rags. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Buy* truth and never sell it, Also wisdom and discipline and understanding. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful; Whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Your father and your mother will rejoice, And she who gave birth to you will be joyful. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>My son, do give your heart to me, And may your eyes take pleasure in my ways. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For a prostitute is a deep pit, And an immoral* woman is a narrow well. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>She lies in wait like a robber; She increases the number of unfaithful men. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Who has woe? Who has uneasiness? Who has quarrels? Who has complaints? Who has wounds for no reason? Who has bleary* eyes? <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Those lingering long over wine; Those searching out* mixed wine. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not look at the wine’s red color As it sparkles in the cup and goes down smoothly, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For in the end it bites like a serpent, And it secretes poison like a viper. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Your eyes will see strange things, And your heart will speak perverse things. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>And you will be like one lying down in the middle of the sea, Like one lying at the top of a ship’s mast. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>You will say: “They have struck me, but I did not feel it.* They beat me, but I did not know it. When will I wake up? I need another drink.”* </p><p><strong>24 </strong>Do not envy evil men, And do not crave their company,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For their heart meditates on violence, And their lips speak of trouble.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>By wisdom a house* is built up, And by discernment it is made secure.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>By knowledge its rooms are filled With all sorts of precious and pleasant treasures.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A wise man is powerful, And with knowledge a man increases his power.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By skillful direction* you will wage your war, And through many advisers* there is victory.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>True wisdom is unattainable for a fool; He has nothing to say in the city gate.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Anyone who plots evil Will be called a master schemer.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Foolish schemes* are sinful, And people detest a ridiculer. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>If you become discouraged in the day of distress,* Your strength will be meager. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Rescue those who are being taken away to death, And hold back those staggering to the slaughter. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If you say, “But we did not know about this,” Does not the One who examines hearts* discern it? Yes, the One who watches you* will know And will repay each man according to his activity. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>My son, eat honey, because it is good; Honey from the comb is sweet to the taste. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you.* If you find it, you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one; Do not destroy his place of rest. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>When your enemy falls, do not rejoice, And when he stumbles, do not let your heart be joyful; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased, And He will turn away his anger from him.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Do not be upset* because of evil men; Do not envy wicked people, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>For there is no future for anyone evil; The lamp of the wicked will be extinguished. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, fear Jehovah and the king. And do not associate with dissenters,* <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For their disaster will arise suddenly. Who knows what ruin both* will bring upon them? <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>These sayings also belong to the wise: Partiality in judgment is not good. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Whoever says to the wicked one, “You are righteous,” Will be cursed by the peoples and denounced by the nations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But it will go well for those reproving him; Blessings of good things will come upon them. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>People will kiss the lips of the one replying honestly.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Prepare your outside work, and get everything ready in the field; Then build your house.* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not testify against your neighbor without grounds. Do not use your lips to deceive others. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not say: “I will do to him just as he has done to me; I will repay him for what he did.”* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>I passed by the field of the lazy one, By the vineyard of the man lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I saw that it was overgrown with weeds; The ground was covered with nettles, And its stone wall was broken down. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>I observed this and took it to heart; I saw it and learned this lesson:* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man. </p><p><strong>25 </strong>These also are the proverbs of Solʹo·mon, which the men of Hez·e·kiʹah the king of Judah transcribed:*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is the glory of God to keep a matter secret, And the glory of kings is to search through a matter.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>As the heavens are high and the earth is deep, So the heart of kings is unsearchable.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Remove the dross from the silver, And it will emerge completely refined.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Remove the wicked one from the king’s presence, And his throne will be firmly established in righteousness.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not honor yourself before the king, And do not take a place among the prominent,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” Than to humiliate you in the presence of a noble.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not rush into a legal dispute, For what will you do later if your neighbor humiliates you?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Plead your case with your neighbor, But do not reveal what you were told confidentially,* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So that the one listening will not put you to shame And you spread a bad report* that cannot be recalled. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Like apples of gold in silver carvings* Is a word spoken at the right time. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold Is a wise reprover to the receptive ear. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Just like the coldness of snow on the day of harvest Is a faithful messenger to those who sent him, For he refreshes his master.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like clouds and wind that bring no rain Is a man who boasts about a gift never given.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>By patience a commander is won over, And a gentle* tongue can break a bone. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>If you find honey, eat only what you need, For if you take too much, you may vomit it up. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Rarely set foot in your neighbor’s house, So that he does not get tired of you and hate you. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Like a war club and a sword and a sharp arrow Is a man bearing false witness against his neighbor. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Like a broken tooth or an unsteady foot Is confidence in an unreliable* person in times of trouble. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Like one who removes a garment on a cold day And like vinegar poured on soda* Is the one who sings songs to a gloomy heart. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>If your enemy* is hungry, give him bread to eat; If he is thirsty, give him water to drink, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For you will be heaping burning coals on his head,* And Jehovah will reward you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The north wind brings a downpour, And a gossiping tongue brings an angry face. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Better to dwell on a corner of the roof Than in the same house with a quarrelsome* wife. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Like cold water on a tired soul* Is a good report from a distant land. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Like a muddied spring and a ruined well Is a righteous person who gives in to* a wicked one. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>It is not good to eat too much honey, Nor is it glorious to seek one’s own glory. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>As a city broken through, without a wall, Is the man who cannot control his temper.* </p><p><strong>26 </strong>Like snow in summer and rain at harvesttime, Honor is not fitting for someone stupid.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Just as a bird has reason to flee and a swallow to fly, So a curse does not come without a real reason.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>A whip is for the horse, a bridle is for the donkey, And the rod is for the back of stupid people.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not answer the stupid one according to his foolishness, So that you do not put yourself on his level.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Answer the stupid one according to his foolishness, So that he does not think he is wise.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Like someone who cripples his own feet and harms himself* Is the one who entrusts matters to someone stupid.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Like the limp* legs of the lame, So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Like tying a stone to a sling, So is giving glory to someone stupid.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Like a thorn plant that comes into the hand of a drunkard, So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Like an archer who wounds at random,* So is the one who hires the stupid one or those passing by. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Like a dog that returns to its vomit, The stupid one repeats his foolishness. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Have you seen a man who thinks he is wise? There is more hope for someone stupid than for him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The lazy one says: “There is a young lion in the road, A lion in the public square!” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A door keeps turning on its hinges,* And the lazy one on his bed. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl, But he is too tired to bring it back to his mouth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The lazy one thinks he is wiser Than seven people who give a sensible reply. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Like someone grabbing hold of a dog’s ears Is the one passing by who becomes furious about* a quarrel that is not his. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Like a madman who shoots fiery missiles, arrows, and death* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Is the man who plays a trick on his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Where there is no wood, the fire goes out, And where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>As charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire, So a contentious man kindles a quarrel. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;* They are gulped right down into the stomach. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Like a silver glazing over a piece of earthenware Are affectionate words from* an evil heart. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The one who hates others disguises it with his lips, But inside he harbors deceit. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Although he speaks graciously, do not trust him, For there are seven detestable things in his heart.* <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Though his hatred is concealed by deceit, His evil will be exposed in the congregation. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one who digs a pit will fall into it, And whoever rolls away a stone—it will come back on him. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A lying tongue hates those crushed by it, And a flattering mouth causes ruin.</p><p></p><p>Or “A good reputation.” Lit., “A name.”</p><p>Lit., “Favor.”</p><p>Lit., “meet together.”</p><p>Or “penalty.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Lit., “He with a good eye.”</p><p>Or “Lawsuits.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Or “rob the soul.”</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “Restrain yourself.”</p><p>Or “a soul full of desire.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Cease from your own understanding.”</p><p>Or “of anyone whose eye is evil.”</p><p>Or “calculating in his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “his heart is not with you.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeemer.”</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “My kidneys.”</p><p>Or “Acquire.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “dullness of.”</p><p>Or “who gather to try out.”</p><p>Or “I felt no pain.”</p><p>Or “I will seek it again.”</p><p>Or “household.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Or “success; salvation.”</p><p>Or “The schemes of a fool.”</p><p>Or “in times of trouble.”</p><p>Or “motives.”</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “is sweet to your soul.”</p><p>That is, the enemy.</p><p>Or “show yourself heated up.”</p><p>Or “those who are for a change.”</p><p>That is, Jehovah and the king.</p><p>Or possibly, “Replying in a straight­forward way is like giving a kiss.”</p><p>Or “household.”</p><p>Or “I will get even with him.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Lit., “I took the discipline:”</p><p>Or “copied and compiled.”</p><p>Or “the secrets of others.”</p><p>Or “a malicious rumor.”</p><p>Or “settings.”</p><p>Or “the soul of his master.”</p><p>Lit., “a gift of falsehood.”</p><p>Or “mild.”</p><p>Or possibly, “a treacherous.”</p><p>Or “alkali.”</p><p>Lit., “the one hating you.”</p><p>That is, to soften the person and melt his hardness.</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “compromises with.” Lit., “staggers before.”</p><p>Or “who has no restraint for his spirit.”</p><p>Or possibly, “So an undeserved curse does not come to pass.”</p><p>Or “So that you do not make yourself his equal.”</p><p>Lit., “drinks violence.”</p><p>Or “dangling.”</p><p>Or “who wounds everyone.”</p><p>Or “pivot.”</p><p>Or possibly, “who meddles in.”</p><p>Or “deadly arrows.”</p><p>Or “like things to be swallowed greedily.”</p><p>Lit., “fervent lips with.”</p><p>Or “For his heart is completely detestable.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016372.xhtml#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:1-21)</strong></a> <span id="citation9"></span>A good name* is to be chosen rather than great wealth; To be respected* is better than silver and gold.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The rich and the poor have this in common:* Jehovah made them both.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah Is riches and glory and life.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path, But whoever values his life* keeps far away from them.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Train a boy* in the way he should go; Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The rich one rules the poor, And the borrower is a slave to the lender.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster, And the rod of his fury will come to its end.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The generous person* will be blessed, For he shares his food with the poor. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Drive away the scornful man, And contention will disappear; Disputes* and insults will cease. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is gracious Will have the king as his friend. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge, But He overturns the words of the treacherous. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the middle of the public square!” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The mouth of wayward* women is a deep pit. The one condemned by Jehovah will fall into it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,* But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealth And the one giving gifts to the rich Will end up in poverty. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise, In order to apply your heart to my knowledge, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you, So that all of them may constantly be on your lips. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For your confidence to be in Jehovah, I am giving you knowledge today. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Have I not already written you, Imparting advice and knowledge, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>To teach you true and reliable words, So that you can return with an accurate report to the one who sent you?</p><p></p><p>Or “A good reputation.” Lit., “A name.”</p><p>Lit., “Favor.”</p><p>Lit., “meet together.”</p><p>Or “penalty.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Lit., “He with a good eye.”</p><p>Or “Lawsuits.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 88 Children Are a Trust From God***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 88</p>
<h1><strong>Children Are a Trust From God</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Psalm 127:3-5</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. When a man becomes a father</p>
<p class="p5">And a woman has a child of her own,</p>
<p class="p6">They share a trust, they must remember,</p>
<p class="p7">That is not theirs, not theirs alone.</p>
<p class="p8">The gift they share is from Jehovah;</p>
<p class="p9">Of life and love he is the one true Source.</p>
<p class="p10">To parents he gives sure direction</p>
<p class="p11">That they may follow the wisest course.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">A sacred trust you have been given;</p>
<p class="p14">A precious life is in your hands.</p>
<p class="p15">You can bestow the greatest favor;</p>
<p class="p16">Instruct your child in God’s commands.</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. All the words God has commanded<wbr />—</p>
<p class="p18">They must always prove to be on your heart.</p>
<p class="p19">These words you’ll speak to sons and daughters;</p>
<p class="p20">This is your trust, this is your part.</p>
<p class="p21">To them you’ll speak along your roadway,</p>
<p class="p22">When you rise up and when you are at rest.</p>
<p class="p23">In years to come, may they remember,</p>
<p class="p24">May they be faithful, may they be blessed.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p25">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p26">A sacred trust you have been given;</p>
<p class="p27">A precious life is in your hands.</p>
<p class="p28">You can bestow the greatest favor;</p>
<p class="p29">Instruct your child in God’s commands.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p30">(See also <span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Deut. 6:6, 7;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> Eph. 6:4;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> 1 Tim. 4:16</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 127:3-5)</strong></a> Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate.</p><p></p><p>Or “Children.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Deut. 6:6, 7)</strong></a> These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and you must inculcate them in* your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.</p><p></p><p>Or “repeat them to; impress them upon.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Eph. 6:4)</strong></a> And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition* of Jehovah.*</p><p></p><p>Or “instruction; guidance.” Lit., “putting mind in.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 4:16)</strong></a> Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w08 4/1 p. 16 Raising Children in a Permissive World***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p21">their innocence, or their clean standing before God is an essential way to show that you love them. In time, they will likely come to understand your motives, and they will appreciate your loving protection.</p>
<p class="p22"><strong>Directing the Arrow</strong></p>
<p class="p23">Note that <span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Psalm 127:4, 5</a> likens the parent to “a mighty man.” Does this mean that only a father can be effective in the parental role? Not at all. In fact, the principle of this illustration applies to both fathers and mothers<wbr />—and to single parents as well. (<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Proverbs 1:8</a>) The phrase “mighty man” suggests that a considerable amount of strength was required to shoot an arrow from a bow. In Bible times, bows were sometimes mounted with copper, and a soldier was said to ‘tread the bow,’ perhaps bracing the bow with his foot so that he could string it. (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Jeremiah 50:14,</a><span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17"> 29</a>) Clearly, much energy and effort went into pulling that taut string back in order to shoot those arrows toward their mark!</p>
<p class="p24">Similarly, raising children requires considerable effort. They do not simply rear themselves, any more than an arrow launches itself toward its target. Sadly, many parents today seem unwilling to expend the kind of effort that is needed. They take the easy way out. They let television, school, and peers teach their children about right and wrong, about morals, about sex. They let their children have whatever they want. And when saying no seems like too much work, they simply say yes<wbr />—often excusing their decision by saying that they do not want to hurt their children’s feelings. In reality, it is their permissiveness that will do their children real, lasting harm.</p>
<p class="p25">Raising children is hard work. Doing that work wholeheartedly with the guidance of God’s Word is certainly demanding, but the rewards are priceless. <em>Parents </em>magazine noted: “Studies . . . have found that children brought up by loving but authoritative parents<wbr />—those who are supportive of their children yet maintain firm limits—<wbr />excel academically, develop better social skills, feel good about themselves, and are happier overall than kids whose parents are either too lenient or excessively harsh.”</p>
<p class="p26">There is an even better reward. Earlier we considered the first part of <span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Proverbs 22:6</a>: “Train up a boy according to the way for him.” The verse continues with these heartwarming words: “Even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.” Does this inspired proverb offer a guarantee of success? Not necessarily. Your child has free will and will grow up to exercise it. But this verse offers parents a loving assurance. What is that?</p>
<p class="p27">If you train your children according to the Bible’s counsel, you are creating the most favorable circumstances to bring about a marvelous result<wbr />—seeing your children grow up to be happy, fulfilled, and responsible adults. (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Proverbs 23:24</a>) By all means, then, prepare those precious “arrows,” protect them, and expend yourself in directing them. You will never regret it.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Ps. 127:4, 5)</strong></a> Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Prov. 1:8)</strong></a> Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Jer. 50:14)</strong></a> Come against Babylon in battle formation on every side, All you who are bending* the bow. Shoot at her, spare no arrow, For it is against Jehovah that she has sinned.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “treading.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Jer. 50:29)</strong></a> Summon archers against Babylon, All who are bending* the bow. Camp all around her; let no one escape. Repay her according to her activity. Do to her just as she has done. For she has acted arrogantly against Jehovah, Against the Holy One of Israel.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “treading.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:6)</strong></a> Train a boy* in the way he should go; Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.</p><p></p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Prov. 23:24)</strong></a> The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful; Whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w07 6/1 p. 31 Questions From Readers***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Questions From Readers</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>Does </strong><span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20"><strong>Proverbs 22:6</strong></a> <strong>guarantee that if Christian children are properly trained, they will not depart from the way of Jehovah?</strong></p>
<p class="p3">This verse reads: “Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.” Just as the bending of a twig influences its growth into a tree, children who are properly trained are more inclined to continue to serve Jehovah when they grow up. As every parent knows, such training takes considerable time and effort. To make Christian disciples of their children, parents must carefully instruct, admonish, encourage, and discipline them as well as set a good example. They must do this consistently and lovingly for many years.</p>
<p class="p4">Does this mean, though, that if a child does turn away from serving Jehovah, parental training is at fault? In some cases, parents may have been deficient in their efforts to bring their children up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Ephesians 6:4</a>) On the other hand, the proverb is not a guarantee that good training will produce children who are faithful to God. Parents cannot mold their children into whatever they wish. Children, like adults, have free will and must ultimately choose their own course in life. (<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Deuteronomy 30:15, 16,</a><span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23"> 19</a>) Despite the most earnest efforts of parents, some children become unfaithful, as did Solomon, who wrote the verse we are considering. Even Jehovah had sons who proved unfaithful.</p>
<p class="p5">Thus, this scripture does not mean that in <em>every case </em>a child “will not turn aside from it” but that <em>generally speaking </em>this would be the result. What an encouragement this is to parents! Parents should take heart from knowing that their earnest efforts to train their children in the way of Jehovah will produce good results. Since their role is important and their influence is great, parents are encouraged to take their role seriously.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Deuteronomy 6:6, 7</a>.</p>
<p class="p6">Even when children turn aside from serving Jehovah, parents who have been conscientious in training their children can entertain the hope that their children will come to their senses. Bible truth is powerful, and parental training is not quickly forgotten.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Psalm 19:7</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:6)</strong></a> Train a boy* in the way he should go; Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.</p><p></p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Eph. 6:4)</strong></a> And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition* of Jehovah.*</p><p></p><p>Or “instruction; guidance.” Lit., “putting mind in.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Deut. 30:15, 16)</strong></a> “See, I do put before you today life and good, and death and bad. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>If you listen to the commandments of Jehovah your God that I am commanding you today, by loving Jehovah your God, by walking in his ways, and by keeping his commandments and his statutes and his judicial decisions, then you will live and multiply, and Jehovah your God will bless you in the land you are going to possess.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(Deut. 30:19)</strong></a> I take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the curse; and you must choose life so that you may live, you and your descendants,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Deut. 6:6, 7)</strong></a> These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and you must inculcate them in* your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.</p><p></p><p>Or “repeat them to; impress them upon.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Ps. 19:7)</strong></a> The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring strength.* The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.</p><p></p><p>Or “restoring (bringing back) the soul.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w97 10/15 p. 32 Raising Moral Children—Is It Still Possible?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Raising Moral Children—Is It Still Possible?</strong></p>
<p class="p2">“WE NOW live in a very complex society, a very heterogeneous culture, where there is no uniform code of morality,” observes Robert Glossop of the Vanier Institute for the Family in Ottawa, Canada. With what result? A report in <em>The Toronto Star </em>newspaper says: “Teen pregnancies, youth violence and teen suicide are all on the increase.”</p>
<p class="p3">The problem extends beyond North America. Bill Damon, director of the Center for Human Development at Brown University in Rhode Island, U.S.A., has studied these issues in Britain and other European nations, as well as in Australia, Israel, and Japan. He points to the decline of churches, schools, and other institutions in providing guidance for the young. Our culture, he believes, “has lost touch with what children need to forge character and competence.” Citing parenting experts who teach that “discipline is hazardous to children’s health and well-being,” Damon maintains that this is “a recipe for raising wilful, disobedient children.”</p>
<p class="p4">What is it that youths of today need? They constantly need loving training that corrects the mind and heart. Different youths require different kinds of discipline. When motivated by love, discipline often can be conveyed by reasoning. That is why we are told at <span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Proverbs 8:33</a> to “listen to discipline.” Some, though, are not “corrected by mere words.” For them, the appropriate punishment for disobedience, administered to the proper degree, may be needed. (<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Proverbs 17:10;</a><span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28"> 23:13, 14;</a><span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29"> 29:19</a>) In making this recommendation, the Bible is not endorsing angry whippings or severe beatings, which may bruise and injure a child. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Proverbs 16:32</a>) Rather, a child should understand why he is being corrected and sense that it is because the parent is with him, on his side.—Compare <span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Hebrews 12:6,</a><span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32"> 11</a>.</p>
<p class="p5">Such practical and sound Biblical advice is highlighted in the book <em>The Secret of Family Happiness.</em></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Prov. 8:33)</strong></a> Listen to discipline and become wise, And never neglect it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Prov. 17:10)</strong></a> A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understanding Than striking a stupid person a hundred times.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Prov. 23:13, 14)</strong></a> Do not hold back discipline from a boy.* If you strike him with the rod, he will not die. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With the rod you should strike him, In order to save him* from the Grave.*</p><p></p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Prov. 29:19)</strong></a> A servant will not let himself be corrected by words, For though he understands, he does not obey.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:32)</strong></a> The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, And the one controlling his temper* than one conquering a city.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “ruling over his spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Heb. 12:6)</strong></a> for those whom Jehovah* loves he disciplines, in fact, he scourges* everyone whom he receives as a son.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “punishes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <strong>(Heb. 12:11)</strong></a> True, no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but it is painful;* yet afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.</p><p></p><p>Or “grievous.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***it-2 p. 818 Rod, Staff***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p12"><strong><em>Parental authority. </em></strong>“Rod” is used also to symbolize the authority of parents over their children. The book of Proverbs makes many references to this authority, the term symbolizing all forms of discipline used, including the literal rod used for chastisement. The parent is actually responsible before God to exercise this rod, controlling the child. If the parent fails in this, he will bring ruination and death to his child and disgrace and God’s disapproval to himself also. (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Pr 10:1;</a><span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34"> 15:20;</a><span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35"> 17:25;</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> 19:13</a>) “Foolishness is tied up with the heart of a boy; the rod of discipline is what will remove it far from him.” “Do not hold back discipline from the mere boy. In case you beat him with the rod, he will not die. With the rod you yourself should beat him, that you may deliver his very soul from Sheol itself.” (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Pr 22:15;</a><span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38"> 23:13, 14</a>) In fact, “the one holding back his rod is hating his son, but the one loving him is he that does look for him with discipline.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Pr 13:24;</a><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"> 19:18;</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> 29:15;</a><span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42"> 1Sa 2:27-36</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <strong>(Prov. 10:1)</strong></a> Proverbs of Solʹo·mon. A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <strong>(Prov. 15:20)</strong></a> A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a stupid man despises his mother.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Prov. 17:25)</strong></a> A stupid son brings grief to his father And heartache* to the one who gave birth to him.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “bitterness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Prov. 19:13)</strong></a> A stupid son brings adversity on his father, And a quarrelsome* wife is like a roof that never stops leaking.</p><p></p><p>Or “nagging.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:15)</strong></a> Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,* But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him.</p><p></p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(Prov. 23:13, 14)</strong></a> Do not hold back discipline from a boy.* If you strike him with the rod, he will not die. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With the rod you should strike him, In order to save him* from the Grave.*</p><p></p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Prov. 13:24)</strong></a> Whoever holds back his rod* hates his son, But the one who loves him disciplines him diligently.*</p><p></p><p>Or “discipline; punishment.”</p><p>Or possibly, “promptly.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Prov. 19:18)</strong></a> Discipline your son while there is hope, And do not become responsible for* his death.</p><p></p><p>Or “desire.” Lit., “raise your soul to.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Prov. 29:15)</strong></a> The rod* and reproof impart wisdom, But a child left unrestrained brings shame on his mother.</p><p></p><p>Or “discipline; punishment.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(1 Sam. 2:27-36)</strong></a> A man of God came to Eʹli and said to him: “This is what Jehovah says: ‘Did I not plainly reveal myself to your father’s house while they were in Egypt as slaves to the house of Pharʹaoh? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>And he was chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to serve as my priest and to go up on my altar to make sacrifices, to offer incense,* and to bear an ephʹod before me; and I gave to the house of your forefather all the offerings made by fire of the Israelites.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Why do you men scorn* my sacrifice and my offering that I have commanded in my place of dwelling? Why do you keep honoring your sons more than me by fattening yourselves from the best portions of every offering of my people Israel? <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>“‘That is why the word of Jehovah the God of Israel is: “I did indeed say that your house and the house of your forefather would always walk before me.” But now Jehovah declares: “It is unthinkable, on my part, because those honoring me I will honor, but those despising me will be treated with contempt.” <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Look! Days are coming when I will cut off your strength* and that of your father’s house, so that no man in your house will live to old age. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>And you will look upon a rival in my dwelling amid all the good that is done to Israel, and never again will there be an old man in your house. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The man of yours whom I do not cut off from serving at my altar will cause your eyes to fail and will bring you grief,* but the greater number of your house will die by the sword of men. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>And what happens to your two sons, Hophʹni and Phinʹe·has, will be the sign for you: On one day both of them will die. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Then I will raise up for myself a faithful priest. He will act in harmony with what is my heart’s desire;* and I will build for him a lasting house, and he will walk before my anointed one always. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Anyone who remains in your house will come and bow down to him for the payment of money and a loaf of bread, and will say: “Assign me, please, to one of the priestly offices to eat a piece of bread.”’”</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “to make sacrificial smoke billow up.”</p><p>Lit., “sons of Israel.”</p><p>Lit., “kick at.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or “will cause your soul to pine away.”</p><p>Or “is in my heart and in my soul.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w04 6/15 p. 14 Rightly Value Your Gift of Life***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 1. What evidence is there that we put a high value on life?</p>
<p class="p3">IF YOU were asked to put a value on your life, what would it be? We highly value life<wbr />—our own and that of others. As evidence of that, we may go to a physician for care when we are sick or for regular checkups. We want to stay alive and healthy. Even most who are old or disabled do not want to die; they want to stay alive.</p>
<p class="qu">2, 3. (a) <span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Proverbs 23:22</a> highlights what obligation? (b) How is God involved in the obligation mentioned at <span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Proverbs 23:22</a>?</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>Your evaluation of life affects your relationships with others. For example, God’s Word directs: “Listen to your father who caused your birth, and do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.” (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Proverbs 23:22</a>) To “listen” means more than just to hear words; this proverb means to hear and then to obey. (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Exodus 15:26;</a><span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47"> Deuteronomy 7:12;</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> 13:18;</a><span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49"> 15:5;</a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> Joshua 22:2;</a><span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51"> Psalm 81:13</a>) What reason does God’s Word give for listening? It is not just that your father and mother are older than you or have more experience. The reason given is that they “caused your birth.” Some versions render this verse: “Listen to your father who gave you life.” Understandably, if you value your life, you feel an obligation to the source of that life.</p>
<p class="p5"><sup>3 </sup>Of course, if you are a true Christian, you recognize Jehovah as the ultimate Source of your life. By him you “have life” itself; you can “move,” act as a sentient creature; and you now “exist” and can think about or plan for the future, including permanent life. (<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Acts 17:28;</a><span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53"> Psalm 36:9;</a><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"> Ecclesiastes 3:11</a>) In line with <span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Proverbs 23:22</a>, it is right to “listen” to God obediently, desirous of grasping and acting on his view of life rather than preferring any other assessment of life.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Prov. 23:22)</strong></a> Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Prov. 23:22)</strong></a> Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 23:22)</strong> Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 15:26)</strong> He said: “If you will strictly listen to the voice of Jehovah your God and will do what is right in his eyes and will pay attention to his commandments and keep all his regulations, I will not bring upon you any of the diseases that I brought upon the Egyptians, for I, Jehovah, am healing you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 7:12)</strong> “If you continue listening to these judicial decisions and you observe them and carry them out, Jehovah your God will keep the covenant and the loyal love about which he swore to your forefathers.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 13:18)</strong> For you should obey* Jehovah your God by keeping all his commandments that I am commanding you today, thus doing what is right in the eyes of Jehovah your God.</p><p></p><p>Or “listen to the voice of.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 15:5)</strong> but only if you strictly obey the voice of Jehovah your God and carefully observe all this commandment that I am giving you today.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 22:2)</strong> and said to them: “You have done all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, and you have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 81:13)</strong> If only my people would listen to me, If only Israel would walk in my ways!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Acts 17:28)</strong> For by him we have life and move and exist, even as some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his children.’*</p><p></p><p>Or “progeny.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 36:9)</strong> With you is the source of life; By your light we can see light.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 3:11)</strong> He has made everything beautiful* in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.</p><p></p><p>Or “well-arranged; proper; appropriate.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 23:22)</strong> Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w00 6/15 p. 21 “All You Are Brothers”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">13. What is the Bible’s view of the elderly in a family?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>13 </sup>Showing honor to family members goes beyond dignifying one’s wife and children. “When old, obey your children,” says a Japanese proverb. The point of that proverb is that elderly parents should refrain from exceeding their parental authority and should take notice of what their grown children say. While it is Scriptural for parents to honor their children by giving them a hearing ear, the children should not display a disrespectful attitude toward older members of the family. “Do not despise your mother just because she has grown old,” says <span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Proverbs 23:22</a>. King Solomon lived up to this proverb and honored his mother when she approached him to make a petition. Solomon had a throne set to the right of his own and listened to what his elderly mother, Bath-sheba, had to tell him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">1 Kings 2:19, 20</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 23:22)</strong> Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(1 Ki. 2:19, 20)</strong> So Bath-sheʹba went in to King Solʹo·mon to speak to him for Ad·o·niʹjah. At once the king rose to meet her and bowed down to her. Then he sat down on his throne and had a throne set for the king’s mother, so that she could sit at his right. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>She then said: “There is one small request that I am making of you. Do not turn me away.” So the king said to her: “Make it, my mother; for I will not turn you away.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w13 3/15 pp. 4-5 For Those Loving Jehovah, “There Is No Stumbling Block”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>IF YOU STUMBLE, STAY IN THE RACE</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>5, 6. </strong>(a) How is there “no stumbling block” for a Christian, and what will help him to “get up”? (b) Why do some not recover after stumbling?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Perhaps you have used the words “stumble” and “fall” interchangeably to describe a spiritual condition. These Bible expressions can, but do not always, have the same sense. For instance, notice the wording of <span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Proverbs 24:16</a>: “The righteous one may fall even seven times, and he will certainly get up; but the wicked ones will be made to stumble by calamity.”</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah will not allow those trusting in him to stumble or to experience a fall<wbr />—an adversity or a setback in their worship—<wbr />from which they <em>cannot </em>recover. We are assured that Jehovah will help us “get up” so that we can continue giving him our utmost devotion. How comforting that is for all who love Jehovah deeply from the heart! The wicked do not have the same desire to get up. They do not seek the help of God’s holy spirit and his people, or they refuse such help when offered to them. In contrast, for those ‘loving Jehovah’s law,’ no stumbling block exists that can permanently knock them out of the race for life.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"><strong><em>Psalm 119:165</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>7, 8. </strong>How can one “fall” and yet have God’s favor?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Some lapse into <em>minor </em>sin<wbr />—even repeatedly—<wbr />because of some weakness. But they are still righteous in Jehovah’s eyes if they continue to “get up,” that is, sincerely repent and strive to resume a course of loyal service. We can see that from the way God dealt with ancient Israel. (<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Isa. 41:9, 10</a>) <span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Proverbs 24:16</a>, quoted earlier, rather than emphasizing the negative<wbr />—our ‘falling’—<wbr />focuses on the positive, our ‘getting up’ with the help of our merciful God. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62"><strong><em>Isaiah 55:7</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>Expressing their confidence in us, Jehovah God and Jesus Christ kindly encourage us to “get up.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Ps. 86:5;</a><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"> John 5:19</a>.</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Even if a runner stumbles or falls in a marathon, he may have time to recover and finish the course if he acts with urgency. In our race for everlasting life, we do not know the “day and hour” when the end of the race will come. (<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Matt. 24:36</a>) Still, the less we stumble, the more likely we are to keep a steady pace, stay in the race, and finish it successfully. So how can we avoid stumbling?</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 24:16)</strong> For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:165)</strong> Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; Nothing can make them stumble.*</p><p></p><p>Or “For them there is no stumbling block.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 41:9, 10)</strong> You, whom I took from the ends of the earth, And you, whom I called from its most distant parts. I said to you, ‘You are my servant; I have chosen you; I have not rejected you. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 24:16)</strong> For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 55:7)</strong> Let the wicked man leave his way And the evil man his thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him, To our God, for he will forgive in a large way.*</p><p></p><p>Or “will freely forgive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 86:5)</strong> For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(John 5:19)</strong> Therefore, in response Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to you, the Son cannot do a single thing of his own initiative, but only what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things that One does, these things the Son does also in like manner.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:36)</strong> “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***w09 10/15 p. 12 Questions From Readers***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p3">In giving advice to a young man, the writer of Proverbs states: “Prepare your work out of doors, and make it ready for yourself in the field. Afterward you must also build up your household.” What point is being made in this inspired proverb? That a man should prepare properly <em>before </em>he gets married and starts his own family, recognizing the responsibilities that come with such a commitment.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***lv pp. 179-181 Find Enjoyment for Your Hard Work***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu">18. Why is it not easy to maintain spiritual balance?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Maintaining spiritual balance is not easy in these “last days” with their “critical times hard to deal with.” (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">2 Timothy 3:1</a>) Finding a job and holding on to it can be a real challenge. As true Christians, we recognize the importance of working hard to provide for our family. But if we are not careful, pressure in the workplace or the world’s infectious materialistic thinking could interfere with our spiritual pursuits. (<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">1 Timothy 6:9, 10</a>) Let us consider how we can keep our balance, making sure of “the more important things.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Philippians 1:10</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">19. Why is Jehovah worthy of our full trust, and what does such trust help us to avoid?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong><em>Place your full trust in Jehovah. </em><strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69"><strong>Proverbs 3:5, 6</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Is he not worthy of such trust? After all, he cares for us. (<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">1 Peter 5:7</a>) He knows our needs better than we do, and his hand is never short. (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Psalm 37:25</a>) We therefore do well to listen when his Word reminds us: “Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For [God] has said: ‘I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.’” (<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Hebrews 13:5</a>) Many full-time servants can testify to God’s ability to provide life’s necessities. If we fully trust that Jehovah will care for us, we will avoid becoming unduly anxious about providing for our family. (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Matthew 6:25-32</a>) We will not allow secular work to cause us to neglect spiritual activities, such as preaching the good news and attending meetings.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Matthew 24:14;</a><span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75"> Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:1)</strong> But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 6:9, 10)</strong> But those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and harmful desires that plunge men into destruction and ruin. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Phil. 1:10)</strong> that you may make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of Christ;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:7)</strong> while you throw all your anxiety* on him, because he cares for you.</p><p></p><p>Or “cares; worries.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 37:25)</strong> I was once young and now I am old, But I have not seen anyone righteous abandoned, Nor his children looking for bread.*</p><p></p><p>Or “food.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 13:5)</strong> Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For he has said: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:25-32)</strong> “On this account I say to you: Stop being anxious about your lives* as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not life* mean more than food and the body than clothing? <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Observe intently the birds of heaven; they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit* to his life span? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Also, why are you anxious about clothing? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not toil, nor do they spin; <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation of the field that is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith? <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>So never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to wear?’ <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. Your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “the soul.”</p><p>See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***sn song 101 Making Known the Kingdom Truth***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 101</p>
<h1><strong>Making Known the Kingdom Truth</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Acts 20:20, 21</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. There was a time we did not know</p>
<p class="p5">The way a Christian ought to go.</p>
<p class="p6">Then Jehovah sent the light,</p>
<p class="p7">His Kingdom truth so clear and bright.</p>
<p class="p8">Our Father’s will we then could see</p>
<p class="p9">To serve the grand Theocracy,</p>
<p class="p10">To declare Jehovah’s fame,</p>
<p class="p11">And help to glorify his holy name.</p>
<p class="p12">We witness now to all we meet,</p>
<p class="p13">From door to door and on the street.</p>
<p class="p14">We take the time to help them see;</p>
<p class="p15">We teach the truth that sets men free.</p>
<p class="p16">And as we strive in ev’ry land</p>
<p class="p17">Jehovah’s worship to expand,</p>
<p class="p18">May we serve our God as one</p>
<p class="p19">Until Jehovah says the work is done.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p20">(See also <span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Josh. 9:9;</a><span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78"> Isa. 24:15;</a><span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79"> John 8:12,</a><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"> 32</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <strong>(Acts 20:20, 21)</strong></a> while I did not hold back from telling you any of the things that were profitable* nor from teaching you publicly and from house to house. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.</p><p></p><p>Or “for your good.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(Josh. 9:9)</strong></a> At this they said to him: “Your servants have come from a very distant land out of regard for the name of Jehovah your God, because we have heard about his fame and about all he did in Egypt</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(Isa. 24:15)</strong></a> That is why they will glorify Jehovah in the region of light;* In the islands of the sea they will glorify the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.</p><p></p><p>Or “in the east.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(John 8:12)</strong></a> Then Jesus spoke again to them, saying: “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will by no means walk in darkness, but will possess the light of life.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(John 8:32)</strong></a> and you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***kr pp. 32-35 Jehovah Reveals His Purpose***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1, 2. </strong>How has Jehovah revealed his purpose for mankind?</p>
<p class="p5">CARING parents include their children in discussions about family matters. They are discreet, however, about the amount of information that they share. They reveal only details that they feel their children are mature enough to absorb.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Similarly, Jehovah has progressively revealed his purpose for the human family. But he has done so only when he knew that the time was right. Consider a brief overview of how Jehovah has revealed truths about the Kingdom throughout history.</p>
<h2><strong>Why the Need for the Kingdom?</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>3, 4. </strong>Did Jehovah predestinate the path of human history? Explain.</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Originally, the Messianic Kingdom was not part of Jehovah’s purpose. Why not? Because Jehovah did not predestinate the path of human history; after all, he created humans with free will. Thus, he told Adam and Eve his purpose for mankind, stating: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it.” (<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Gen. 1:28</a>) Jehovah also required that they respect his standards of good and bad. (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Gen. 2:16, 17</a>) Adam and Eve could have chosen to remain loyal. If they and their descendants had done so, we would not need the Kingdom ruled by Christ to fulfill God’s purpose. Right now, the globe would be teeming with perfect people, all worshipping Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The rebellion of Satan, Adam, and Eve did not cause Jehovah to abandon his purpose to fill the earth with a perfect human family. Instead, Jehovah adapted his method of fulfilling it. His purpose is not like a train that must run on a certain track to reach its destination and can be derailed by the actions of others. Once Jehovah states his purpose, no force in the universe can prevent its fulfillment. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83"><strong>Isaiah 55:11</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>If a challenge threatens to block one track, Jehovah uses another.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> (<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">Ex. 3:14, 15</a>) When he sees fit, he informs his loyal servants of the new method he will use to accomplish his purpose.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>5. </strong>How did Jehovah respond to the rebellion in Eden?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>In response to the rebellion in Eden, Jehovah purposed to set up the Kingdom. (<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Matt. 25:34</a>) At that dark point in human history, Jehovah began to shed light on the instrument that he would use to restore mankind and undo the hurt caused by Satan’s futile grab for power. (<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Gen. 3:14-19</a>) Even so, Jehovah did not disclose details about the Kingdom all at once.</p>
<h2><strong>Jehovah Begins to Reveal Truths About the Kingdom</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>What did Jehovah promise, but what did he not reveal?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>With the very first prophecy, Jehovah promised that a certain “offspring” would crush the serpent. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87"><strong>Genesis 3:15</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>However, the identities of that offspring and the offspring of the serpent were not revealed at that time. In fact, Jehovah did not shed more light on such details for some 2,000 years.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a></p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>7. </strong>Why was Abraham chosen, and what key lesson do we learn from this?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Eventually, Jehovah chose Abraham as the one through whom the promised offspring would come. Abraham was chosen because he “listened to [Jehovah’s] voice.” (<span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88">Gen. 22:18</a>) We learn a key lesson from that fact<wbr />—Jehovah reveals his purpose only to those who have a reverential fear of him.<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"><strong>Psalm 25:14</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>8, 9. </strong>What facts about the promised offspring did Jehovah reveal to Abraham and Jacob?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>When speaking to his friend Abraham through an angel, Jehovah for the first time revealed this vital fact about the promised offspring: He would be human. (<span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90">Gen. 22:15-17;</a><span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91"> Jas. 2:23</a>) But how would this human crush the serpent? Who was the serpent? Later revelations would shed light on those questions.</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah determined that the promised offspring would come through Abraham’s grandson Jacob, a man who displayed great faith in God. (<span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92">Gen. 28:13-22</a>) By means of Jacob, Jehovah disclosed that the Promised One would be a descendant of Jacob’s son Judah. Jacob prophesied that this descendant of Judah would receive a “scepter,” a rod symbolizing royal authority, and that to this one ‘the obedience of the peoples would belong.’ (<span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93">Gen. 49:1,</a><span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94"> 10</a>) With that pronouncement, Jehovah indicated that the Promised One would become a ruler, a king.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>10, 11. </strong>Why did Jehovah reveal his purpose to David and Daniel?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Some 650 years after Judah’s day, Jehovah revealed more about his purpose to King David, a descendant of Judah. Jehovah described David as “a man agreeable to his heart.” (<span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95">1 Sam. 13:14;</a><span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96"> 17:12;</a><span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97"> Acts 13:22</a>) Because David had a reverential fear of God, Jehovah chose to make a covenant with him, promising him that one of his descendants would rule forever.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">2 Sam. 7:8,</a><span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99"> 12-16</a>.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>About 500 years later, Jehovah used the prophet Daniel to disclose the exact year when this Anointed One, or Messiah, would appear on earth. (<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Dan. 9:25</a>) Jehovah considered Daniel to be “someone very precious.” Why? Because Daniel deeply respected Jehovah and served him continually.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Dan. 6:16;</a><span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102"> 9:22, 23</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>12. </strong>What was Daniel told to do, and why?</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Even though Jehovah used such faithful prophets as Daniel to record dozens of details about the promised offspring, the Messiah, it was not yet Jehovah’s time for his servants to understand the full significance of what he inspired them to write. For example, after being given a vision involving the establishment of God’s Kingdom, Daniel was told to seal up the prophecy until the time appointed by Jehovah. At that future time, true knowledge would “become abundant.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103">Dan. 12:4</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 1:28)</strong> Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 2:16, 17)</strong> Jehovah God also gave this command to the man: “From every tree of the garden you may eat to satisfaction. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 55:11)</strong> So my word that goes out of my mouth will be.* It will not return to me without results, But it will certainly accomplish whatever is my delight,* And it will have sure success in what I send it to do.</p><p></p><p>Or “will prove to be.”</p><p>Or “my will.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 3:14, 15)</strong> So God said to Moses: “I Will Become What I Choose* to Become.”* And he added: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘I Will Become has sent me to you.’” <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Then God said once more to Moses: “This is what you are to say to the Israelites, ‘Jehovah the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my name forever, and this is how I am to be remembered from generation to generation.</p><p></p><p>Or “Want.”</p><p>Or “I Will Prove to Be What I Will Prove to Be.” See App. A4.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 25:34)</strong> “Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:14-19)</strong> Then Jehovah God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are the cursed one out of all the domestic animals and out of all the wild animals of the field. On your belly you will go, and you will eat dust all the days of your life. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And I will put enmity* between you and the woman and between your offspring* and her offspring.* He will crush* your head, and you will strike* him in the heel.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>To the woman he said: “I will greatly increase the pain of your pregnancy; in pain you will give birth to children, and your longing will be for your husband, and he will dominate you.” <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And to Adam* he said: “Because you listened to your wife’s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>In the sweat of your face you will eat bread* until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.”</p><p></p><p>Or “hostility.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “bruise; strike.”</p><p>Or “bruise; crush.”</p><p>Meaning “Earthling Man; Mankind; Humankind.”</p><p>Or “food.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:15)</strong> And I will put enmity* between you and the woman and between your offspring* and her offspring.* He will crush* your head, and you will strike* him in the heel.”</p><p></p><p>Or “hostility.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “bruise; strike.”</p><p>Or “bruise; crush.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 22:18)</strong> And by means of your offspring* all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves because you have listened to my voice.’”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 25:14)</strong> Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him, And he makes his covenant known to them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 22:15-17)</strong> And Jehovah’s angel called to Abraham a second time from the heavens, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>saying: “‘By myself I swear,’ declares Jehovah, ‘that because you have done this and you have not withheld your son, your only one, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I will surely bless you and I will surely multiply your offspring* like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand on the seashore, and your offspring* will take possession of the gate* of his enemies.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “the cities.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 2:23)</strong> and the scripture was fulfilled that says: “Abraham put faith in Jehovah,* and it was counted to him as righteousness,” and he came to be called Jehovah’s* friend.</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 28:13-22)</strong> And look! there was Jehovah stationed above it, and he said: “I am Jehovah the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac. The land on which you are lying, to you I am going to give it and to your offspring.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And your offspring* will certainly become like the dust particles of the earth, and you will spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and by means of you and by means of your offspring* all the families of the ground will certainly be blessed.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I am with you, and I will safeguard you wherever you go, and I will return you to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Then Jacob awoke from his sleep and said: “Truly Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.” <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And he grew fearful and added: “How awe-inspiring this place is! This can only be the house of God, and this is the gate of the heavens.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>So Jacob got up early in the morning and took the stone on which he had rested his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So he named that place Bethʹel,* but previously the city’s name was Luz. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jacob then made a vow, saying: “If God will continue with me and will protect me on my journey and will give me bread to eat and garments to wear <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>and I return in peace to the house of my father, then Jehovah will certainly have proved to be my God. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>And this stone that I have set up as a pillar will become a house of God, and without fail I will give you a tenth of everything you give to me.”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “will obtain a blessing for themselves.”</p><p>Meaning “House of God.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 49:1)</strong> And Jacob called his sons and said: “Gather yourselves together that I may tell you what will happen to you in the final part of the days.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 49:10)</strong> The scepter will not depart from Judah, neither the commander’s staff from between his feet, until Shiʹloh* comes, and to him the obedience of the peoples will belong.</p><p></p><p>Meaning “He Whose It Is; He to Whom It Belongs.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(1 Sam. 13:14)</strong> But now your kingdom will not last. Jehovah will find a man agreeable to his heart, and Jehovah will commission him as a leader over his people, because you did not obey what Jehovah commanded you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(1 Sam. 17:12)</strong> Now David was the son of the Ephʹrath·ite from Bethʹle·hem of Judah named Jesʹse, who had eight sons and who in the days of Saul was already an old man.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Acts 13:22)</strong> After removing him, he raised up for them David as king, about whom he bore witness and said: ‘I have found David the son of Jesʹse a man agreeable to my heart; he will do all the things I desire.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 7:8)</strong> Now say this to my servant David, ‘This is what Jehovah of armies says: “I took you from the pastures, from following the flock, to become a leader over my people Israel.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 7:12-16)</strong> When your days come to an end and you are laid to rest with your forefathers, then I will raise up your offspring* after you, your own son,* and I will firmly establish his kingdom. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He is the one who will build a house for my name, and I will firmly establish the throne of his kingdom forever. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I will become his father, and he will become my son. When he does wrong, I will reprove him with the rod of men and with the strokes of the sons of men.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My loyal love will not be taken away from him the way I took it away from Saul, whom I removed from before you. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your house and your kingdom will be secure forever before you; your throne will be firmly established forever.”’”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “one who will come out of your inward parts.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Adam.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 9:25)</strong> You should know and understand that from the issuing of the word to restore and to rebuild Jerusalem until Mes·siʹah* the Leader, there will be 7 weeks, also 62 weeks. She will be restored and rebuilt, with a public square and moat, but in times of distress.</p><p></p><p>Or “the Anointed One.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 6:16)</strong> So the king gave the order, and they brought Daniel and threw him into the pit of lions. The king said to Daniel: “Your God whom you are continually serving will rescue you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 9:22, 23)</strong> And he gave me understanding, saying: “O Daniel, now I have come to give you insight and understanding. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>When you began your entreaty the word went out, and I have come to report it to you, because you are someone very precious.* So consider the matter and understand the vision.</p><p></p><p>Or “very desirable; highly esteemed.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 12:4)</strong> “As for you, Daniel, keep the words secret, and seal up the book until the time of the end. Many will rove about,* and the true knowledge will become abundant.”</p><p></p><p>Or “examine it [that is, the book] thoroughly.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> God’s name is a form of the Hebrew verb meaning “to become.” Jehovah’s name implies that he is the Fulfiller of his promises. See the box “The Meaning of God’s Name,” in Chapter 4.</p></div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> Although this amount of time may seem extensive today, we must remember that human life spans used to be much longer; there were only four lifespans that overlapped from Adam to Abraham. Adam’s life overlapped the life of Lamech, Noah’s father. Lamech’s life overlapped that of Shem, Noah’s son. Shem’s life overlapped that of Abraham.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104">Gen. 5:5,</a><span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105"> 31;</a><span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106"> 9:29;</a><span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107"> 11:10, 11;</a><span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108"> 25:7</a>.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <strong>(Gen. 5:5)</strong></a> So all the days of Adam’s life amounted to 930 years, and then he died.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <strong>(Gen. 5:31)</strong></a> So all the days of Laʹmech amounted to 777 years, and then he died.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <strong>(Gen. 9:29)</strong></a> So all the days of Noah amounted to 950 years, and he died.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <strong>(Gen. 11:10, 11)</strong></a> This is the history of Shem. Shem was 100 years old when he became father to Ar·pachʹshad two years after the Flood. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>After becoming father to Ar·pachʹshad, Shem continued to live 500 years. And he became father to sons and daughters.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <strong>(Gen. 25:7)</strong></a> The years of Abraham’s life were 175 years.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***kr pp. 30-31 Kingdom Truth—Dispensing Spiritual Food***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl"><strong>SECTION 1</strong></p>
<h1><strong>Kingdom Truth<wbr />—Dispensing Spiritual Food</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p3">YOU see your Bible student’s eyes light up as he grasps the meaning of the scripture you have just read together. Slowly, he says, “Do you mean that the Bible teaches that we can live in Paradise forever<wbr />—right here on this earth?” Your companion in the ministry smiles and says, “Well, what did you see in the Bible?” Overwhelmed, the student shakes his head in wonderment, saying, “I just can’t believe that I was never taught this before!” You recall that he said something similar just a few weeks ago when he learned for the first time that God’s name is Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p4">Have you ever had such an experience? Many of God’s people have. Few things can so vividly remind us of the precious gift we have been given<wbr />—the knowledge of <em>the truth! </em>Stop and think: How did that gift come to you? In this section we will examine that question. The way that God’s people have progressively received spiritual enlightenment is a vivid proof that God’s Kingdom is real. For a century, its King, Jesus Christ, has been actively ensuring that God’s people are taught the truth.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016372.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***snnw song 146 You Did It for Me***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 146</p>
<h1><strong>You Did It for Me</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109">Matthew 25:34-40</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             Other sheep Jesus has, and they serve alongside</p>
<p class="p8">those anointed to be Christ’s heavenly bride.</p>
<p class="p9">All the things that are done</p>
<p class="p10">for their comfort and aid</p>
<p class="p11">are things he considers that must be repaid.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">“If you comforted them, you comforted me.</p>
<p class="p14">If you did it for them, you did it for me.</p>
<p class="p15">Your labors for them were your labors for me.</p>
<p class="p16">You did it for them; you did it for me.</p>
<p class="p17">If you did it for them, you did it for me.”</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">             “Yes, you comforted me in my hunger and thirst,</p>
<p class="p19">and whatever my need, you came to me first.”</p>
<p class="p20">“Tell us, when did we do this?”</p>
<p class="p21">these ones will reply.</p>
<p class="p22">The King will then answer them, telling them why:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p23">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p24">“If you comforted them, you comforted me.</p>
<p class="p25">If you did it for them, you did it for me.</p>
<p class="p26">Your labors for them were your labors for me.</p>
<p class="p27">You did it for them; you did it for me.</p>
<p class="p28">If you did it for them, you did it for me.”</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p29">             “You’ve been loyal to me, doing works that are fine,</p>
<p class="p30">as you preach alongside these brothers of mine.”</p>
<p class="p31">So the King will then say</p>
<p class="p32">to the sheep on his right:</p>
<p class="p33">“Inherit the earth and perfection of life.”</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p34">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p35">“If you comforted them, you comforted me.</p>
<p class="p36">If you did it for them, you did it for me.</p>
<p class="p37">Your labors for them were your labors for me.</p>
<p class="p38">You did it for them; you did it for me.</p>
<p class="p39">If you did it for them, you did it for me.”</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p40">(See also <span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110">Prov. 19:17;</a><span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111"> Matt. 10:40-42;</a><span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112"> 2 Tim. 1:16, 17</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <strong>(Matt. 25:34-40)</strong></a> “Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably; <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>naked* and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you visited me.’ <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked and clothe you? <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>In reply the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’</p><p></p><p>Or “not sufficiently dressed.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <strong>(Prov. 19:17)</strong></a> The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, And He will repay* him for what he does.</p><p></p><p>Or “reward.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:40-42)</strong></a> “Whoever receives you receives me also, and whoever receives me receives also the One who sent me. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Whoever receives a prophet because he is a prophet will get a prophet’s reward, and whoever receives a righteous man because he is a righteous man will get a righteous man’s reward. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>And whoever gives one of these little ones only a cup of cold water to drink because he is a disciple, I tell you truly, he will by no means lose his reward.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 1:16, 17)</strong></a> May the Lord grant mercy to the household of On·e·siphʹo·rus, for he often refreshed me, and he did not become ashamed of my prison chains. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>On the contrary, when he was in Rome, he diligently looked for me and found me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
