<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 October 24-30</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016370.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 17:1-21:31)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Better is a piece of dry bread where there is peace* Than a house full of feasting* along with quarreling.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A servant with insight will rule over a son who acts shamefully; He will share in the inheritance as one of the brothers.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold, But Jehovah is the examiner of hearts.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A wicked man pays attention to hurtful speech, And a deceptive man listens to a malicious tongue.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker, And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Grandsons* are a crown to the aged, And fathers* are the glory of their sons.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Upright* speech does not befit a fool. How much less does false speech befit a ruler!*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>A gift is like a precious stone* to its owner; Everywhere he turns, it brings him success.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Whoever forgives* a transgression seeks love, But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understanding Than striking a stupid person a hundred times. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>A bad man seeks only rebellion, But a cruel messenger will be sent to punish him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Better to meet a bear bereaved of her cubs Than to encounter someone stupid in his foolishness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>If anyone repays bad for good, Bad will not depart from his house. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate;* Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Anyone who acquits the wicked one and anyone who condemns the righteous one —Both of them are detestable to Jehovah. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdom When he has no heart for acquiring it?* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>A true friend shows love at all times, And is a brother who is born for times of distress. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A man lacking good sense* shakes hands and agrees To put up security* in the presence of his neighbor. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The one who loves conflict loves transgression. Anyone who makes his entryway high invites a crash. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one who is crooked at heart will not find success,* And the one who speaks deceitfully will fall into ruin. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The one who fathers a stupid child will experience grief; And the father of a senseless child has no joy. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>A joyful heart is good medicine,* But a crushed spirit saps one’s strength.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A wicked man will take a bribe in secret* To pervert the course of justice. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person, But the eyes of the stupid wander to the ends of the earth. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>A stupid son brings grief to his father And heartache* to the one who gave birth to him. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>To punish* the righteous one is not good, And to flog honorable people goes against what is right. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A man of knowledge restrains his words, And a discerning man will remain calm.* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Even a fool who keeps silent will be considered wise, And the one who seals his lips, discerning. </p><p><strong>18 </strong>Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires; He rejects* all practical wisdom.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding; He would rather disclose what is in his heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When a wicked person comes, contempt also comes, And along with dishonor there is disgrace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters. The fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>It is not good to show partiality to the wicked one Or to deprive the righteous one of justice.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The speech of the stupid one leads to quarrels, And his mouth invites a beating.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The mouth of the stupid is his ruin, And his lips are a snare for his life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;* They are gulped right down into the stomach.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Whoever is lazy in his work Is a brother to the one who causes ruin. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. Into it the righteous one runs and receives protection.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The wealth of the rich is his fortified city; It is like a protective wall in his imagination. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Before a crash a man’s heart is lofty, And before glory there is humility. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts, It is foolish and humiliating. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness, But who can bear a crushed spirit?* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge, And the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A man’s gift opens the way for him; It gives him access to great people. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The first to state his case seems right, Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Casting lots puts an end to disputes And decides between* strong opponents. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city, And there are disputes like the bars of a fortress. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of a man’s speech* his stomach will be filled; He will be satisfied with what his lips produce. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Death and life are in the power of the tongue; Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The one who finds a good wife has found something good, And he receives Jehovah’s favor.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The poor man implores when speaking, But the rich man answers harshly. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>There are companions ready to crush one another, But there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother. </p><p><strong>19 </strong>It is better to be poor and walk in integrity Than to be stupid and speak lies.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A person* without knowledge is not good, And the one who acts rashly* is sinning.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way, And his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Wealth attracts many friends, But the poor man will be deserted even by his friend.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will not escape.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Many seek the favor of a noble,* And everyone is a friend to the man who gives gifts.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>All the brothers of a poor man hate him; How much more he is shunned by his friends! He pursues them with requests, but no one responds.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whoever acquires good sense* loves himself.* Whoever treasures discernment will find success.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will perish. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury; How much less for a servant to rule over princes! <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, And it is beauty on his part to overlook* an offense.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The king’s rage is like the growling of a lion,* But his favor is like dew on the vegetation. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A stupid son brings adversity on his father, And a quarrelsome* wife is like a roof that never stops leaking. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A house and wealth are inherited from fathers, But a discreet wife is from Jehovah. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Laziness brings on a deep sleep, And a sluggish person* will go hungry. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The one who keeps the commandment keeps his life;* The one who is reckless about his ways will die. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, And He will repay* him for what he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Discipline your son while there is hope, And do not become responsible for* his death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The hot-tempered man will pay the penalty; If you try to spare him, you will have to do it again and again. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Listen to counsel and accept discipline, In order to become wise in your future. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Many are the plans in a man’s heart, But the counsel* of Jehovah is what will prevail. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The desirable thing in a man is his loyal love; And it is better to be poor than to be a liar. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah leads to life; The one who has it will have a pleasant rest, free from harm. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl, But he does not even bother to bring it back to his mouth. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Strike the ridiculer, so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd, And reprove the understanding one, so that he will increase in knowledge. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The one who mistreats his father and drives away his mother Is a son causing shame and disgrace. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>My son, if you stop listening to discipline, You will stray from the sayings of knowledge. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A worthless witness mocks justice, And the mouth of the wicked gulps down evil. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Judgment is in store for ridiculers, And beatings for the back of the stupid ones. </p><p><strong>20 </strong>Wine is a ridiculer, alcohol is unruly; Whoever goes astray by them is not wise.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The terror* of a king is like the growling of a lion;* Whoever provokes his anger risks his own life.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is honorable for a man to refrain from a dispute, But every fool will become embroiled in it.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The lazy one does not plow in winter, So he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The thoughts* of a man’s heart are like deep waters, But the discerning man draws them out.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Many men proclaim their loyal love, But who can find a faithful man?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The righteous one is walking in his integrity. Happy are his children* who come after him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>When the king sits on the throne to judge, He sifts out all evil with his eyes.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Who can say: “I have cleansed my heart; I am pure from my sin”? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Dishonest weights and false measures* —Both are detestable to Jehovah. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Even a child* is known by his actions, Whether his behavior is pure and right. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The hearing ear and the seeing eye —Jehovah has made both of them. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty. Open your eyes, and you will be satisfied with bread. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“It is no good, it is no good!” says the buyer; Then he goes away and boasts about himself. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>There is gold, also much coral,* But the lips of knowledge are something precious. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger; Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Bread gained by deceit tastes good to a man, But afterward his mouth will be full of gravel. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>By consultation,* plans will succeed,* And by skillful direction* wage your war. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk; Do not associate with one who loves to gossip.* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Whoever curses his father and his mother, His lamp will be extinguished when darkness comes. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>An inheritance obtained first by greed Will not be a blessing in the end. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Do not say: “I will pay back evil!” Hope in Jehovah, and he will save you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Dishonest weights* are detestable to Jehovah, And deceptive scales are not good. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>A man’s footsteps are directed by Jehovah; How can a man understand his own way?* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!” And only later to give consideration to what he vowed. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>A wise king sifts out the wicked And drives the threshing wheel over them. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The breath of a man is the lamp of Jehovah, Searching through his innermost being. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Loyal love and faithfulness safeguard the king; By loyal love he sustains his throne. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The glory of young men is their strength, And the splendor of old men is their gray hair. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Bruises and wounds purge* away evil, And beatings cleanse one’s innermost being. </p><p><strong>21 </strong>A king’s heart is like streams of water in Jehovah’s hand. He directs it wherever He pleases.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right to him, But Jehovah examines the hearts.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>To do what is right and just Is more pleasing to Jehovah than a sacrifice.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Haughty eyes and an arrogant heart —The lamp that guides the wicked is sin.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The plans of the diligent surely lead to success,* But all who are hasty surely head for poverty.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Gaining treasures by a lying tongue Is like a vanishing mist, a deadly snare.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The violence of the wicked will sweep them away, For they refuse to act with justice.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The way of a guilty man is crooked, But the activity of the pure man is upright.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Better to dwell on a corner of the roof Than in the same house with a quarrelsome* wife. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The wicked man* craves what is bad; He shows no favor toward his neighbor. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When a ridiculer is punished, the inexperienced become wiser, And when a wise person receives insight, he gains knowledge.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked one; He overthrows the wicked to their ruin. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly one Will himself call and not be answered. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A secret gift subdues anger, And a hidden bribe,* fierce rage. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is a joy for the righteous one to act with justice, But it is something terrible to those who practice evil. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The man who strays from the way of insight Will rest in the company of those powerless in death. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who loves having a good time* will come to poverty; The one who loves wine and oil will not grow rich. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The wicked one is a ransom for the righteous one, And the treacherous one will be taken in place of the upright. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Better to dwell in the wilderness Than with a quarrelsome* and irritable wife. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Precious treasure and oil are found in the house of the wise, But the stupid man will squander* what he has. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal love Will find life, righteousness, and glory. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>A wise man can scale* the city of the mighty And undermine the strength in which they trust. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The one guarding his mouth and his tongue Keeps himself* out of trouble. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>A presumptuous, arrogant braggart is what you call The man who acts with reckless presumptuousness. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>What the lazy man craves will put him to death, For his hands refuse to work. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>All day long he greedily craves, But the righteous one gives, holding nothing back. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable. How much more when he offers it with evil intent!* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A lying witness will perish, But the man who listens will testify with success.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The wicked man puts on a bold face, But it is the upright one whose course is sure.* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The horse is prepared for the day of battle, But salvation belongs to Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “quietness.”</p><p>Lit., “sacrifices.”</p><p>Or “Grandchildren.”</p><p>Or “parents.”</p><p>Or “children.”</p><p>Or “Fine.”</p><p>Or “noble.”</p><p>Or “is a stone that brings favor.”</p><p>Lit., “covers over.”</p><p>Or “like opening a dam.” Lit., “letting out waters.”</p><p>Or “When he is lacking good sense?”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “go surety.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “good for healing.”</p><p>Or “dries up the bones.”</p><p>Lit., “a bribe from the bosom.”</p><p>Lit., “bitterness.”</p><p>Or “impose a fine on.”</p><p>Lit., “cool of spirit.”</p><p>Or “shows contempt for.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “like things to be swallowed greedily.”</p><p>Lit., “is raised high,” that is, out of reach, safe.</p><p>Or “complete despair?”</p><p>Or “searches him through.”</p><p>Lit., “separates.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “hastens with his feet.”</p><p>Or “generous man.”</p><p>Lit., “acquires heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Lit., “pass over.”</p><p>Or “a transgression.”</p><p>Or “a maned young lion.”</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “reward.”</p><p>Or “desire.” Lit., “raise your soul to.”</p><p>Or “purpose.”</p><p>Or “fearsomeness.”</p><p>Or “a maned young lion.”</p><p>Or possibly, “They will look during the harvest but find nothing.”</p><p>Or “intentions.” Lit., “counsel.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Or “Two different stone weights and two different measuring containers.”</p><p>Or “boy.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “a foreigner.”</p><p>Or “counsel.”</p><p>Or “be made firm.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “who entices with his lips.”</p><p>Or “Two different stone weights.”</p><p>Or “the way to go?”</p><p>Or “scour.”</p><p>Or “motives.”</p><p>Or “advantage.”</p><p>Or possibly, “for those seeking death.”</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>Or “The soul of the wicked one.”</p><p>Or “he knows what to do.”</p><p>Lit., “a bribe in the bosom.”</p><p>Or “loves pleasure.”</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>Lit., “swallow.”</p><p>Or “prevail over.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “along with shameful conduct!”</p><p>Lit., “speak forever.”</p><p>Or “who makes his way sure.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016370.xhtml#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Prov. 18:14-19:10)</strong></a> <span id="citation9"></span>A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness, But who can bear a crushed spirit?* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge, And the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A man’s gift opens the way for him; It gives him access to great people. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The first to state his case seems right, Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Casting lots puts an end to disputes And decides between* strong opponents. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city, And there are disputes like the bars of a fortress. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of a man’s speech* his stomach will be filled; He will be satisfied with what his lips produce. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Death and life are in the power of the tongue; Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The one who finds a good wife has found something good, And he receives Jehovah’s favor.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The poor man implores when speaking, But the rich man answers harshly. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>There are companions ready to crush one another, But there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother. </p><p><strong>19 </strong>It is better to be poor and walk in integrity Than to be stupid and speak lies.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A person* without knowledge is not good, And the one who acts rashly* is sinning.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way, And his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Wealth attracts many friends, But the poor man will be deserted even by his friend.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will not escape.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Many seek the favor of a noble,* And everyone is a friend to the man who gives gifts.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>All the brothers of a poor man hate him; How much more he is shunned by his friends! He pursues them with requests, but no one responds.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whoever acquires good sense* loves himself.* Whoever treasures discernment will find success.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will perish. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury; How much less for a servant to rule over princes!</p><p></p><p>Or “complete despair?”</p><p>Or “searches him through.”</p><p>Lit., “separates.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “hastens with his feet.”</p><p>Or “generous man.”</p><p>Lit., “acquires heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 76 Jehovah, God of Peace***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 76</p>
<h1><strong>Jehovah, God of Peace</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Philippians 4:9</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Jehovah, God of peace,</p>
<p class="p5">God of love that will not cease.</p>
<p class="p6">Grant us peaceful, calm conditions,</p>
<p class="p7">That good fruitage may increase.</p>
<p class="p8">Your counsel we have sought;</p>
<p class="p9">With your Son our lives were bought.</p>
<p class="p10">May you grant us now your own peace</p>
<p class="p11">That excels all human thought.</p>
<p class="p12">2. This world seeks peace in vain.</p>
<p class="p13">They have sown and reaped much pain.</p>
<p class="p14">But upon your favored people,</p>
<p class="p15">Peace descends like gentle rain.</p>
<p class="p16">As we discern your will</p>
<p class="p17">And our vows to you fulfill,</p>
<p class="p18">May you please now bless our efforts</p>
<p class="p19">And more peace in us instill.</p>
<p class="p20">3. Your spirit aids our sight</p>
<p class="p21">As your Word gives needed light.</p>
<p class="p22">We are guided and protected</p>
<p class="p23">In a world as dark as night.</p>
<p class="p24">May peace just like the dew</p>
<p class="p25">Calm our thoughts, refresh us too,</p>
<p class="p26">That our hearts and mental powers</p>
<p class="p27">Might be safe by means of you.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Ps. 4:8;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> Phil. 4:6, 7;</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> 1 Thess. 5:23</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Phil. 4:9)</strong></a> The things that you learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these, and the God of peace will be with you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Ps. 4:8)</strong></a> I will lie down and sleep in peace, For you alone, O Jehovah, make me dwell in security.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Phil. 4:6, 7)</strong></a> Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers* by means of Christ Jesus.</p><p></p><p>Or “your minds; your thoughts.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(1 Thess. 5:23)</strong></a> May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. And may the spirit and soul* and body of you brothers, sound in every respect, be preserved blameless at the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.</p><p></p><p>Or “life.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w14 12/1 pp. 12-13 “The Insight of a Man Certainly Slows Down His Anger”***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1><strong>“The Insight of a Man Certainly Slows Down His Anger”</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="openingContent"><p class="p2">A college basketball coach is fired because of his uncontrolled anger.</p>
<p class="p3">A child throws a temper tantrum for not getting his way.</p>
<p class="p4">A mother gets into a shouting match with her son because of his messy room.</p>
</div>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p5">ALL of us have seen people get angry, and no doubt we ourselves have become irate at one time or another. While we may view anger as a negative emotion that should be suppressed, we often feel that we have a valid reason to be upset, especially when someone appears to overstep our sense of justice. An article by the American Psychological Association even suggests that “anger is a completely normal, usually healthy, human emotion.”</p>
<p class="p6">Such a view may seem plausible when we consider what the Christian apostle Paul wrote under divine inspiration. Acknowledging that there may be times when people become angry, he said: “Be wrathful, but do not sin; do not let the sun set while you are still angry.” (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Ephesians 4:26</a>) In view of this, should we vent our anger, or should we do what we can to control it?</p>
<h2><strong>SHOULD YOU GET ANGRY?</strong></h2>
<p class="p8">When Paul gave that counsel about anger, he apparently had in mind the words of the psalmist who wrote: “Be agitated, but do not sin.” (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Psalm 4:4</a>) What, though, was the intent of Paul’s inspired admonition? He went on to explain: “Put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech, as well as everything injurious.” (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Ephesians 4:31</a>) Paul was in fact encouraging Christians to avoid giving vent to anger. Interestingly, the American Psychological Association article goes on to say: “Research has found that ‘letting it rip’ with anger actually escalates anger and aggression and does nothing to help you . . . resolve the situation.”</p>
<p class="p9">How, then, can we “put away” anger and all its bad effects? Wise King Solomon of ancient Israel wrote: “The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, and it is beauty on his part to overlook an offense.” (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Proverbs 19:11</a>) How does “the insight of a man” help when rage wells up within him?</p>
<h2><strong>HOW INSIGHT SLOWS DOWN ANGER</strong></h2>
<p class="p11">Insight is the ability to see into a situation. To have insight means to see beyond the surface of a matter. How does that help when we are offended or provoked?</p>
<p class="p12">When we see an injustice, we may well become indignant. However, if we follow our emotions and react violently, we may end up hurting ourselves or someone else. Just as an uncontrolled fire can burn down a house, the flare of anger may destroy our reputation and our relationships with others, even with God. So when we feel anger welling up inside us, it is time to take a deeper look into the situation. Seeing a more complete picture of what is happening will surely help us to control our emotions.</p>
<p class="p13">Solomon’s father, King David, narrowly escaped incurring bloodguilt in connection with a man named Nabal, thanks to David’s being helped to see into the situation. David and his men protected Nabal’s sheep in the Judean wilderness. When the time came for shearing the flock, David asked Nabal for some provisions. At that, Nabal answered: “Do I have to take my bread and my water and the meat that I butchered for my shearers and give it to men who come from who knows where?” What an insult! When David heard those words, he, with some 400 men, set out to annihilate Nabal and his household.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">1 Samuel 25:4-13</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">Nabal’s wife, Abigail, learned about the incident and went out to see David. Upon meeting David and his men, she fell at his feet and said: “Let your servant girl speak to you, and listen to the words of your servant girl.” Then, she explained to David how senseless Nabal was and pointed out that David would regret taking revenge and shedding blood.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">1 Samuel 25:24-31</a>.</p>
<p class="p15">What insight did David gain from Abigail’s words that helped to defuse the tense situation? First, he saw that Nabal was a senseless man by nature, and second, David saw that he could incur bloodguilt if he avenged himself. Like David, you may be infuriated by something. What should you do? “Take a few moments to breathe deeply and count to 10,” suggests a Mayo Clinic article on anger management. Yes, stop and think what the cause of the problem is and what the consequences of your intended action might be. Let insight slow down your anger<wbr />—even dispel it.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">1 Samuel 25:32-35</a>.</p>
<p class="p16">In a similar way, many today have been helped to control their anger. Sebastian explained how, as a 23-year-old inmate in a Polish prison, he learned to control his temper and strong emotions through a study of the Bible. “First, I think about the problem,” he said. “Then, I try to apply the Bible’s counsel. I found that the Bible is the best guidebook.”</p>
<p class="p17">Setsuo followed basically the same tactic. He said: “I used to shout at others when I was irritated by them at work. Now that I’ve studied the Bible, instead of shouting I ask myself: ‘Who is at fault anyway? Am I not the one causing the problem?’” Thinking about such questions slowed down his anger, and he was able to contain the strong feelings that welled up in his heart.</p>
<p class="p18">The emotion of anger may be very strong, but counsel from God’s Word is stronger still. By applying the Bible’s wise counsel and praying for God’s help, you too can let your insight slow down or control your anger.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Eph. 4:26)</strong></a> Be wrathful, but do not sin; do not let the sun set while you are still angry;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Ps. 4:4)</strong></a> Be agitated, but do not sin. Have your say in your heart, upon your bed, and keep silent. (<em>Selah</em>)</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Eph. 4:31)</strong></a> Put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech, as well as everything injurious.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Prov. 19:11)</strong></a> The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, And it is beauty on his part to overlook* an offense.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “pass over.”</p><p>Or “a transgression.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(1 Sam. 25:4-13)</strong></a> David heard in the wilderness that Naʹbal was shearing his sheep. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So David sent ten young men to him, and David told the young men: “Go up to Carʹmel, and when you come to Naʹbal, ask him in my name about his welfare. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then say, ‘May you live long and may you be well* and may your household be well and may all that you have be well. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Now I hear that you are doing your shearing. When your shepherds were with us, we did not harm them, and they found nothing missing the whole time they were in Carʹmel. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Ask your young men, and they will tell you. May my young men find favor in your eyes, because we have come at a joyous time.* Please give to your servants and to your son David whatever you can spare.’” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So David’s young men went and told all of this to Naʹbal in David’s name. When they finished, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Naʹbal answered David’s servants: “Who is David, and who is the son of Jesʹse? Nowadays many servants are breaking away from their masters. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Do I have to take my bread and my water and the meat that I butchered for my shearers and give it to men who come from who knows where?” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>At that David’s young men returned and reported all these words to him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>David immediately said to his men: “Everyone strap on your sword!” So they all strapped on their swords, and David also strapped on his own sword, and about 400 men went up with David, while 200 men stayed with the baggage.</p><p></p><p>Or “may you have peace.”</p><p>Lit., “a good day.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(1 Sam. 25:24-31)</strong></a> She then fell at his feet and said: “My lord, let the blame be on me; let your servant girl speak to you, and listen to the words of your servant girl. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Please, do not let my lord pay attention to this worthless Naʹbal, for he is just like his name. Naʹbal* is his name, and senselessness is with him. But I, your servant girl, did not see my lord’s young men whom you sent. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>And now, my lord, as surely as Jehovah is living and as you are* living, it is Jehovah who has held you back from incurring bloodguilt and from taking revenge* with your own hand. May your enemies and those seeking injury to my lord become like Naʹbal. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Now let this gift* that your servant girl has brought to my lord be given to the young men who are following my lord. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Pardon, please, the transgression of your servant girl, for Jehovah will without fail make for my lord a lasting house, because my lord is fighting the wars of Jehovah, and no evil has been found in you all your days. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>When someone rises up to pursue you and seeks your life,* the life* of my lord will be wrapped securely in the bag of life with Jehovah your God, but the lives* of your enemies he will hurl away like stones from a sling.* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>And when Jehovah has done for my lord all the good things he has promised and he appoints you as leader over Israel, <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>you will have no remorse or regret* in your heart for shedding blood without cause and for letting the hand of my lord take revenge.* When Jehovah confers good upon my lord, remember your servant girl.”</p><p></p><p>Meaning “Senseless; Stupid.”</p><p>Or “your soul is.”</p><p>Or “bringing salvation.”</p><p>Lit., “blessing.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “as from the hollow of a sling.”</p><p>Lit., “staggering or stumbling.”</p><p>Or “bring salvation.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(1 Sam. 25:32-35)</strong></a> At this David said to Abʹi·gail: “Praise Jehovah the God of Israel, who sent you this day to meet me! <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>And blessed be your good sense! May you be blessed for restraining me this day from incurring bloodguilt and from taking revenge* with my own hands. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Otherwise, as surely as Jehovah the God of Israel who held me back from harming you is living, if you had not come quickly to meet me, by morning there would not have remained a single male* belonging to Naʹbal.” <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>With that David accepted from her what she had brought him and said to her: “Go up in peace to your house. See, I have listened to you, and I will grant your request.”</p><p></p><p>Or “bringing salvation.”</p><p>Lit., “anyone urinating against a wall.” A Hebrew expression of contempt referring to males.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w11 8/15 p. 30 Pursue Peace***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p15"><strong>When Called Upon to Help</strong></p>
<p class="qu">11. What care should an elder exercise if a Christian wants to talk to him about a dispute with a fellow believer?</p>
<p class="p16"><sup>11 </sup>What if a Christian wants to talk to an elder about a problem he or she is having with a relative or with a fellow believer? <span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Proverbs 21:13</a> states: “Anyone stopping up his ear from the complaining cry of the lowly one, he himself also will call and not be answered.” An elder would certainly not ‘stop up his ear.’ However, another proverb warns: “The first to state his case seems right, until his opponent begins to cross-examine him.” (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Prov. 18:17</a>, <em>New English Translation</em>) An elder should listen kindly, but he needs to be careful not to take sides with the one reporting the offense. After listening to the matter, he would likely ask whether the offended party has spoken to the one who caused the upset. The elder may also review Scriptural steps that the offended one can take to pursue peace.</p>
<p class="qu">12. Cite examples showing the danger of acting hastily after hearing a complaint.</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>12 </sup>Three Biblical examples underscore the danger of acting hastily after hearing only one side of a controversy. Potiphar believed his wife’s story that Joseph had tried to rape her. With unjustified anger, Potiphar had Joseph thrown into prison. (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Gen. 39:19, 20</a>) King David believed Ziba, who said that his master, Mephibosheth, had sided with David’s enemies. “Look! Yours is everything that belongs to Mephibosheth” was David’s hasty response. (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">2 Sam. 16:4;</a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> 19:25-27</a>) King Artaxerxes was told that the Jews were rebuilding Jerusalem’s walls and were about to rebel against the Persian Empire. The king believed the false report and ordered that all rebuilding in Jerusalem cease. As a result, the Jews stopped work on God’s temple. (<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Ezra 4:11-13,</a><span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29"> 23, 24</a>) Christian elders wisely follow Paul’s counsel to Timothy to avoid making premature judgments.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30"><strong><em>1 Timothy 5:21</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu">13, 14. (a) All of us have what limitations respecting the disputes of others? (b) What help do elders have in making correct judgments respecting fellow believers?</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>13 </sup>Even when it seems that both sides of a dispute have come to light, it is important to realize that “if anyone thinks he has acquired knowledge of something, he does not yet know it just as he ought to know it.” (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">1 Cor. 8:2</a>) Do we really know all the details that led up to the dispute? Can we fully understand the backgrounds of the individuals involved? When called upon to judge, how vital it is that elders not let themselves be deceived by falsehood, clever tactics, or rumors! God’s appointed Judge, Jesus Christ, judges righteously. He does not “judge by any mere appearance to his eyes, nor reprove simply according to the thing heard by his ears.” (<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Isa. 11:3, 4</a>) Rather, Jesus is guided by Jehovah’s spirit. Christian elders likewise have the benefit of being guided by God’s holy spirit.</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>14 </sup>Before they make judgments respecting fellow believers, elders need to pray for the help of Jehovah’s spirit and depend on its guidance by consulting God’s Word and the publications of the faithful and discreet slave class.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Matt. 24:45</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 21:13)</strong> Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly one Will himself call and not be answered.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 18:17)</strong> The first to state his case seems right, Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.*</p><p></p><p>Or “searches him through.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 39:19, 20)</strong> As soon as his master heard the words his wife spoke to him, saying: “These are the things your servant did to me,” his anger blazed. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So Joseph’s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest, and he remained there in the prison.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 16:4)</strong> The king then said to Ziʹba: “Look! Everything that belongs to Me·phibʹo·sheth is yours.” Ziʹba replied: “I bow down before you. May I find favor in your eyes, my lord the king.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 19:25-27)</strong> When he came to* Jerusalem to meet the king, the king said to him: “Why did you not go with me, Me·phibʹo·sheth?” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>To this he said: “My lord the king, my servant tricked me. For your servant had said, ‘Let me get my donkey saddled so that I may ride on it and go with the king,’ for your servant is crippled. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But he slandered your servant to my lord the king. However, my lord the king is like an angel of the true God, so do whatever seems good to you.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “from.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ezra 4:11-13)</strong> this is a copy of the letter that they sent him.) “To King Ar·ta·xerxʹes from your servants, the men of the region Beyond the River: And now <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>let it be known to the king that the Jews who came up here from you to us have arrived at Jerusalem. They are rebuilding the rebellious and wicked city, and they are finishing the walls and repairing the foundations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Now let it be known to the king that if this city should be rebuilt and its walls finished, they will not give tax, tribute, or toll, and it will result in a loss to the treasuries of the kings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ezra 4:23, 24)</strong> Now after the copy of the official document of King Ar·ta·xerxʹes had been read before Reʹhum and Shimʹshai the scribe and their colleagues, they quickly went to Jerusalem to the Jews and used force to stop them. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>It was then that the work on the house of God, which was in Jerusalem, came to a halt; and it remained at a standstill until the second year of the reign of King Da·riʹus of Persia.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 5:21)</strong> I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels to observe these instructions without any prejudice or partiality.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 8:2)</strong> If anyone thinks he knows something, he does not yet know it as he should know it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 11:3, 4)</strong> And he will find delight in the fear of Jehovah. He will not judge by what appears to his eyes, Nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He will judge the lowly with fairness,* And with uprightness he will give reproof in behalf of the meek ones of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth And put the wicked to death with the breath* of his lips.</p><p></p><p>Or “righteousness.”</p><p>Or “spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w11 8/15 p. 31 Pursue Peace***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">17. All Christians play what part in pursuing peace?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>17 </sup>Most disputes between brothers do not involve serious wrongdoing that requires judicial action. How good it is, therefore, lovingly to cover over the mistakes of others. “The one covering over transgression is seeking love,” says God’s Word, “and he that keeps talking about a matter is separating those familiar with one another.” (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Prov. 17:9</a>) Complying with those words will help all of us to preserve peace in the congregation and maintain a good relationship with Jehovah.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Matt. 6:14, 15</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 17:9)</strong> Whoever forgives* a transgression seeks love, But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “covers over.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:14, 15)</strong> “For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>whereas if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w10 11/15 p. 6 Young Ones—Be Guided by God’s Word***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">17. What questions could you ask yourself when choosing entertainment?</p>
<p class="p22"><sup>17 </sup>To remain loyal to God when you are by yourself, you must develop your “perceptive powers . . . to distinguish both right and wrong” and then train those powers “through use” by acting on what you know is right. (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Heb. 5:14</a>) For example, when choosing the music you listen to, the movies you watch, or the Internet sites that you visit, here is what will help you choose what is right and avoid what is wrong. Ask yourself the following questions: ‘Will this material encourage me to be tenderly compassionate or will it influence me to rejoice “at another’s disaster”?’ (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Prov. 17:5</a>) ‘Will it help me to “love what is good” or will it make it difficult for me to “hate what is bad”?’ (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Amos 5:15</a>) What you do when you are alone reveals the values you really treasure.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Luke 6:45</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 5:14)</strong> But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment* trained to distinguish both right and wrong.</p><p></p><p>Or “their perceptive powers.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 17:5)</strong> Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker, And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Amos 5:15)</strong> Hate what is bad, and love what is good, Let justice prevail in the city gate. It may be that Jehovah the God of armies Will show favor to the remaining ones of Joseph.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Luke 6:45)</strong> A good man brings good out of the good treasure of his heart, but a wicked man brings what is wicked out of his wicked treasure; for out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w10 11/15 p. 31 We Shall Walk in Our Integrity!***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">15. Why is it wrong to rejoice when calamity befalls someone hating us?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>15 </sup>Upright Job never rejoiced if calamity befell someone hating him. A later proverb warns: “When your enemy falls, do not rejoice; and when he is caused to stumble, may your heart not be joyful, that Jehovah may not see and it be bad in his eyes and he certainly turn back his anger from against him.” (<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Prov. 24:17, 18</a>) Since Jehovah can read the heart, he knows if we are secretly rejoicing over another person’s calamity and surely does not approve of such an attitude. (<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Prov. 17:5</a>) God may deal with us accordingly, for he says: “Vengeance is mine, and retribution.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Deut. 32:35</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 24:17, 18)</strong> When your enemy falls, do not rejoice, And when he stumbles, do not let your heart be joyful; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased, And He will turn away his anger from him.*</p><p></p><p>That is, the enemy.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 17:5)</strong> Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker, And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 32:35)</strong> Vengeance is mine, and retribution, At the appointed time when their foot slips, For the day of their disaster is near, And what awaits them will come quickly.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w09 5/15 pp. 15-16 Youths—Make Your Advancement Manifest***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Preparing for a Successful Marriage</strong></p>
<p class="qu">12. Why should a Christian considering marriage apply the principle found at <span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Proverbs 20:25</a>?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>12 </sup>Some young adults have rushed into marriage, believing that it is the solution to unhappiness, loneliness, boredom, and problems at home. However, the exchanging of marriage vows is a serious matter. Some in Bible times rashly made a sacred, or holy, vow without carefully analyzing what was involved. (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44"><em>Proverbs 20:25</em></a><em>.</em>) At times, young adults do not seriously consider the demands of marriage. Later, they find that much more is involved than they had realized.</p>
<p class="qu">13. What questions should those contemplating courtship consider, and what helpful advice is available to them?</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>13 </sup>So before pursuing a courtship, ask yourself: ‘Why do I want to get married? What expectations do I have? Is this the right person for me? What can I bring to a marriage?’ To help you make an insightful examination, “the faithful and discreet slave” has published very specific articles.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Matt. 24:45-47</a>) View such material as advice that Jehovah is giving you. Carefully evaluate what is stated there and apply it. Never allow yourself to become “like a horse or mule without understanding.” (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Ps. 32:8, 9</a>) Become full-grown in your understanding of the demands of marriage. If you feel that you are ready to pursue a courtship, always remember to be “an example . . . in chasteness.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">1 Tim. 4:12</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Prov. 20:25)</strong></a> It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!” And only later to give consideration to what he vowed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 20:25)</strong> It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!” And only later to give consideration to what he vowed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 32:8, 9)</strong> “I will give you insight and instruct you in the way you should go. I will give you advice with my eye upon you.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not become like a horse or a mule, without understanding, Whose spiritedness must be controlled with a bridle or a halter Before it will come near to you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 4:12)</strong> Never let anyone look down on your youth. Instead, become an example to the faithful ones in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.*</p><p></p><p>Or “purity.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> “Is This Person Right for Me?” in the book <em>Questions Young People Ask<wbr />—Answers That Work, </em>Volume 2; “Divine Guidance for Selecting a Marriage Mate,” in <em>The Watchtower </em>of May 15, 2001; and “How Wise Is a Teenage Marriage?” in <em>Awake! </em>of September 22, 1983.</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***lv pp. 57-58 How to Keep Separate From the World***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu">14. In regard to our appearance and hygiene, what questions should we ask ourselves?</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Our dress, grooming, and cleanliness are even more important when we are engaging in the field ministry or attending a Christian meeting. Ask yourself: ‘Do my appearance and personal hygiene draw undue attention to me? Do they embarrass others? Do I consider my rights in these areas to be more important than qualifying for service privileges in the congregation?’<wbr />—<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Psalm 68:6;</a><span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49"> Philippians 4:5;</a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> 1 Peter 5:6</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">15. Why does God’s Word not set out a list of rules on dress, grooming, and hygiene?</p>
<p class="p21"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The Bible does not set out for Christians a list of rules on dress, grooming, and hygiene. Jehovah has no desire to deny us our freedom of choice or the use of our thinking faculties. Rather, he wants us to become mature people who reason on Bible principles and who “through use have their powers of discernment trained to distinguish both right and wrong.” (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Hebrews 5:14</a>) Above all, he wants us to be governed by love<wbr />—love for God and neighbor. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52"><strong>Mark 12:30, 31</strong></a><strong>.)</strong> Within those boundaries, there is the potential for great variety in dress and grooming. Evidence of this can be seen in the colorfully dressed, joyful throngs of Jehovah’s people no matter where on earth they are gathered.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 68:6)</strong> God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in; He leads prisoners out into prosperity. But the stubborn* must live in a parched land.</p><p></p><p>Or “rebellious.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Phil. 4:5)</strong> Let your reasonableness become known to all men. The Lord is near.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:6)</strong> Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in due time,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 5:14)</strong> But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment* trained to distinguish both right and wrong.</p><p></p><p>Or “their perceptive powers.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Mark 12:30, 31)</strong> and you must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’ <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The second is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***sn song 77 Be Forgiving***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 77</p>
<h1><strong>Be Forgiving</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Psalm 86:5</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Lovingly Jehovah</p>
<p class="p5">Made provision through his Son</p>
<p class="p6">For our sins to be forgiven</p>
<p class="p7">And for death to be undone.</p>
<p class="p8">If we truly are repentant,</p>
<p class="p9">His forgiveness we can claim</p>
<p class="p10">On the basis of Christ’s ransom,</p>
<p class="p11">Asking pardon in his name.</p>
<p class="p12">2. We receive such mercy</p>
<p class="p13">When we act like God above</p>
<p class="p14">And forgive each other freely,</p>
<p class="p15">Showing empathy and love.</p>
<p class="p16">Putting up with one another,</p>
<p class="p17">Putting hurtfulness away;</p>
<p class="p18">Showing honor to our brother,</p>
<p class="p19">Showing love’s surpassing way.</p>
<p class="p20">3. Mercy is a virtue</p>
<p class="p21">That we all should cultivate.</p>
<p class="p22">It will keep us from resentment,</p>
<p class="p23">From the bitterness of hate.</p>
<p class="p24">When we imitate Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p25">Who is unsurpassed in love,</p>
<p class="p26">We will truly be forgiving;</p>
<p class="p27">We will be like God above.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Matt. 6:12;</a><span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55"> Eph. 4:32;</a><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"> Col. 3:13</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(Ps. 86:5)</strong></a> For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:12)</strong></a> and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(Eph. 4:32)</strong></a> But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another just as God also by Christ freely forgave you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Col. 3:13)</strong></a> Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah* freely forgave you, you must also do the same.</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***kr pp. 23-25 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>A Time of Revival!</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>35. </strong>Why did Jesus allow hardships to afflict his followers, and what action did he take to help them?</p>
<p class="p47"><strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Little did the enemies of the truth know that Jesus allowed these hardships to afflict his people only because Jehovah was then sitting “as a refiner and cleanser of silver.” (<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Mal. 3:3</a>) Jehovah and his Son were sure that the faithful ones would emerge from those fiery tests refined, purified, and better suited than ever for service to the King. From early in 1919, it became clear that God’s spirit had done what the enemies of his people thought impossible. The faithful ones were revived! (<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Rev. 11:11</a>) At that time, Christ evidently fulfilled a key feature of the sign of the last days. He appointed “the faithful and discreet slave,” a small group of anointed men who would take the lead among his people by dispensing spiritual food at the proper time.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">Matt. 24:45-47</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>36. </strong>What showed that God’s people were reviving spiritually?</p>
<p class="p48"><strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Brother Rutherford and his associates were released from prison on March 26, 1919. A convention was soon scheduled for that September. Plans got under way to start up a second journal, to be called <em>The Golden Age. </em>A companion to <em>The Watch Tower, </em>it was designed for use in the field ministry.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> The same year saw the publication of the first issue of the <em>Bulletin, </em>which is now the meeting workbook for Our Christian Life and Ministry. From the start, it has always been a stimulus to the field ministry. Without a doubt, from 1919 onward the personal, house-to-house ministry came increasingly to the fore.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>37. </strong>In the years after 1919, how did some prove disloyal?</p>
<p class="p49"><strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>The preaching work continued to refine Christ’s servants, for the proud and arrogant among them had no stomach for such humble work. Those who would not get in step with the work parted company with the faithful ones. In the years following 1919, some disloyal ones were embittered and resorted to slander and libel, even siding with the persecutors of Jehovah’s faithful servants.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>38. </strong>What do the successes and victories of Christ’s followers on earth furnish for us?</p>
<p class="p50"><strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Despite such attacks, though, Christ’s followers on earth continued to thrive and to prosper spiritually. Their every success, their every victory since then, furnishes us with convincing proof that God’s Kingdom rules! Only by God’s active support and blessing<wbr />—which he provides through his Son and the Messianic Kingdom—<wbr />could a group of mere imperfect humans win victory after victory over Satan and this wicked system of things!<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60"><strong>Isaiah 54:17</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>39, 40. </strong>(a) What are some of the features of this publication? (b) What can studying this book do for you?</p>
<p class="p51"><strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>In the chapters that follow, we will examine what God’s Kingdom has accomplished on earth in the century since it was born in heaven. Each section of this book will cover a distinct aspect of the Kingdom work here on earth. In each chapter, a review box will help us individually to determine just how real the Kingdom is to us. In the concluding chapters, we will discuss what to expect when the Kingdom comes in the near future to destroy the wicked and usher in a paradise earth. What will studying this publication do for you?</p>
<p class="p52"><strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>Satan wants to erode your faith in God’s Kingdom. But Jehovah wants to strengthen your faith so that it will protect you and keep you strong. (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Eph. 6:16</a>) Therefore, we urge you to study this publication prayerfully. Keep asking yourself, ‘Is God’s Kingdom <em>real </em>to me?’ The more real it is to you now, the more likely it is that you will be on hand, faithfully and actively supporting that Kingdom, on the day when everyone alive will see that God’s Kingdom is real and that it is ruling!</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 35</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:3)</strong> And he will sit as a refiner and cleanser of silver and will cleanse the sons of Leʹvi; and he will clarify* them like gold and like silver, and they will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness.</p><p></p><p>Or “refine.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 35</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 11:11)</strong> After the three and a half days, spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who saw them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 35</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 38</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 54:17)</strong> No weapon formed against you will have any success, And you will condemn any tongue that rises up against you in the judgment. This is the heritage* of the servants of Jehovah, And their righteousness is from me,” declares Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “inheritance.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 40</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 6:16)</strong> Besides all of this, take up the large shield of faith, with which you will be able to extinguish all the wicked one’s burning arrows.*</p><p></p><p>Or “missiles; darts.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 36</span></a> For many years <em>The Watch Tower </em>was intended mainly for members of the little flock for their personal edification.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***kr chap. 2 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>How Real Is the Kingdom to You?</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p60">            Who helped to prepare Jesus’ true followers for the birth of the Kingdom?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p61">            In what ways were true Christians prepared for the rule of God’s Kingdom?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p62">            What features mark the Kingdom as a real government? (See the box “God’s Kingdom<wbr />—A Real Government.”)</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p63">            How can you imitate Christ’s faithful followers of a century ago as you support the Kingdom today?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***kr pp. 26-27 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>GOD’S KINGDOM—A REAL GOVERNMENT</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p97">Is God’s Kingdom a real government? Consider just a few of the features of God’s Kingdom. Ask yourself, ‘Does not each feature show that the Kingdom is just as real as<wbr />—and far superior to—<wbr />any human government on earth today?’</p>
<ul><li><h3><strong>A RULER</strong></h3>
<p class="p99">Enthroned in 1914, Jesus Christ is a powerful, just, wise, and merciful King who is humble before Jehovah God. (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Isa. 9:6, 7;</a><span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63"> 11:1-3</a>) Unlike imperfect human rulers, he cannot be corrupted, nor is he hampered by fractious congresses and parliaments or self-seeking lobbyists and special-interest groups.</p>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>LEGISLATIVE AND JUDICIAL POWERS</strong></h3>
<p class="p101">Jesus’ life and example while on earth form the basis for a perfect law, “the law of the Christ.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Gal. 6:2;</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> 1 Pet. 2:21</a>.</p>
<p class="p102">Jehovah has entrusted all judging to his Son, and Jesus carries out that assignment perfectly, as no human judge ever could.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">John 5:22</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>A BODY OF ADMINISTRATORS</strong></h3>
<p class="p104">Jesus has 144,000 corulers who will share in administering his just reign over the earth. A key objective of his rule is to reconcile humans to God, so his corulers will also serve as priests for that purpose.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Rev. 14:1;</a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> 20:6</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>AN ARMY</strong></h3>
<p class="p106">As Leader of Jehovah’s vast army of mighty angels, Jesus commands the most powerful military force ever to exist. It will soon wage war on all wickedness.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Ps. 45:1,</a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> 3-5;</a><span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71"> Rev. 19:11,</a><span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"> 14-16</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>A SEAT OF GOVERNMENT</strong></h3>
<p class="p108">Jesus’ throne is in heaven, at the side of his Father. Heaven is Jehovah’s “lofty abode of holiness and glory.” (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Isa. 63:15</a>) Is it a real place? Yes, more so than any capital city or government building you can see, for heavenly things do not decay.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Matt. 6:20</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>A TERRITORY ON EARTH</strong></h3>
<p class="p110">Today, Jesus’ subjects are like foreigners who live as law-abiding citizens in every land and nation. But Jehovah has provided a spiritual land for them, a realm of activity in which they carry out the King’s will. (<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Isa. 60:2;</a><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"> 66:8</a>) Soon, Jesus’ Kingdom will claim the entire earth as its physical territory.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Ps. 72:8</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS</strong></h3>
<p class="p112">God’s Kingdom will soon fulfill God’s promises to provide all these blessings and more.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Ps. 72:16;</a><span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79"> Isa. 2:3;</a><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"> 33:24;</a><span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81"> 35:6;</a><span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82"> 65:21</a>.</p>
<ul><li><p class="p113">HEALTH</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p114">HOUSING</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p115">EMPLOYMENT</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p116">NOURISHMENT</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p117">EDUCATION</p>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>A POPULATION OF LOYAL SUBJECTS</strong></h3>
<p class="p119">“A ruler without subjects is ruined,” explains the Bible, whereas “a multitude of people are a king’s majesty.” (<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">Prov. 14:28</a>) The Kingdom’s population of loyal subjects has surged in number to well over seven and a half million.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">Ps. 72:8;</a><span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85"> Isa. 60:22</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Isa. 9:6, 7)</strong></a> For a child has been born to us, A son has been given to us; And the rulership* will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>To the increase of his rulership* And to peace, there will be no end, On the throne of David and on his kingdom In order to establish it firmly and to sustain it Through justice and righteousness, From now on and forever. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.</p><p></p><p>Or “government; princely rule.”</p><p>Or “government; princely rule.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Isa. 11:1-3)</strong></a> A twig will grow out of the stump of Jesʹse, And a sprout from his roots will bear fruit.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And the spirit of Jehovah will settle upon him, The spirit of wisdom and of understanding, The spirit of counsel and of mightiness, The spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And he will find delight in the fear of Jehovah. He will not judge by what appears to his eyes, Nor reprove simply according to what his ears hear.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Gal. 6:2)</strong></a> Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and in this way you will fulfill the law of the Christ.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:21)</strong></a> In fact, to this course you were called, because even Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(John 5:22)</strong></a> For the Father judges no one at all, but he has entrusted all the judging to the Son,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Rev. 14:1)</strong></a> Then I saw, and look! the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him 144,000 who have his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Rev. 20:6)</strong></a> Happy and holy is anyone having part in the first resurrection; over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and they will rule as kings with him for the 1,000 years.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Ps. 45:1)</strong></a> My heart is stirred by something good. I say: “My song is* about a king.” May my tongue be the stylus* of a skilled copyist.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “My works are.”</p><p>Or “pen.”</p><p>Or “scribe.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(Ps. 45:3-5)</strong></a> Strap your sword on your side, O mighty one, In your dignity and your splendor.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And in your splendor go on to victory;* Ride in the cause of truth and humility and righteousness, And your right hand will accomplish* awe-inspiring things.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Your arrows are sharp, making peoples fall before you; They pierce the hearts of the king’s enemies.</p><p></p><p>Or “success.”</p><p>Lit., “teach you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Rev. 19:11)</strong></a> I saw heaven opened, and look! a white horse. And the one seated on it is called Faithful and True, and he judges and carries on war in righteousness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Rev. 19:14-16)</strong></a> Also, the armies in heaven were following him on white horses, and they were clothed in white, clean, fine linen. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And out of his mouth protrudes a sharp, long sword with which to strike the nations, and he will shepherd them with a rod of iron. Moreover, he treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>On his outer garment, yes, on his thigh, he has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(Isa. 63:15)</strong></a> Look down from heaven and see From your lofty abode of holiness and glory.* Where are your zeal and your mightiness, The stirring of your compassions* and your mercy? They are withheld from me.</p><p></p><p>Or “beauty.”</p><p>Lit., “The agitation of your inward parts.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:20)</strong></a> Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes, and where thieves do not break in and steal.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(Isa. 60:2)</strong></a> For look! darkness will cover the earth And thick gloom the nations; But on you Jehovah will shine, And on you his glory will be seen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <strong>(Isa. 66:8)</strong></a> Who has ever heard of such a thing? Who has seen such things? Will a land be brought to birth in one day? Or will a nation be born all at once? Yet, as soon as Zion went into labor, she gave birth to her sons.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:8)</strong></a> He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:16)</strong></a> There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Isa. 2:3)</strong></a> And many peoples will go and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, To the house of the God of Jacob. He will instruct us about his ways, And we will walk in his paths.” For law* will go out of Zion, And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem.</p><p></p><p>Or “instruction.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(Isa. 33:24)</strong></a> And no resident* will say: “I am sick.” The people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error.</p><p></p><p>Or “inhabitant.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Isa. 35:6)</strong></a> At that time the lame will leap like the deer, And the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy. For waters will burst forth in the wilderness, And streams in the desert plain.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Isa. 65:21)</strong></a> They will build houses and live in them, And they will plant vineyards and eat their fruitage.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <strong>(Prov. 14:28)</strong></a> A multitude of people are a king’s majesty, But a ruler without subjects is ruined.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:8)</strong></a> He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <strong>(Isa. 60:22)</strong></a> The little one will become a thousand And the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***kr pp. 28-29 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>PREPARED FOR THE BIRTH OF THE KINGDOM</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p122">Consider some historical events from the decades leading up to 1914. Can you see how these developments helped God’s people to be prepared for the birth of the Messianic Kingdom?</p>
<ol><li><p class="p123"><strong>Mid-1800’s</strong></p>
<p class="p124">Henry Grew, George Stetson, and George Storrs scrutinize and expose the falseness of the doctrine of the immortality of the human soul</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p125"><strong>1868 or 1869</strong></p>
<p class="p126">Charles T. Russell begins a careful examination of the doctrines of Christendom’s churches and finds misinterpretations of the Scriptures; Russell’s “wavering faith” is reestablished after he hears a sermon by Adventist preacher Jonas Wendell</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p127"><strong>1870</strong></p>
<p class="p128">Brother Russell forms a Bible study group; they begin a systematic study of the Bible</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p129"><strong>1870-1875</strong></p>
<p class="p130">Truths regarding the soul, the ransom, and the manner of Christ’s return become clearer</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p131"><strong>1876</strong></p>
<p class="p132">An article by C. T. Russell, published in the <em>Bible Examiner, </em>points to 1914 as the end of the Gentile Times</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p133"><strong>1877</strong></p>
<p class="p134"><em>The Object and Manner of Our Lord’s Return </em>is published to clarify truths regarding Christ’s presence</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p135"><strong>1879</strong></p>
<p class="p136">The first issue of <em>Zion’s Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence </em>is published</p>
<p class="p137">Babylon the Great is recognized as being associated with the nominal churches of Christendom</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p138"><strong>1880</strong></p>
<p class="p139">Brother Russell tours the northeastern United States to visit and strengthen study groups</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p140"><strong>1881</strong></p>
<p class="p141">Multipage tracts (some over 100 pages long) are published and provided to <em>Watch Tower </em>readers for free public distribution</p>
<p class="p142">The <em>Watch Tower </em>invites all readers to commemorate the Memorial in Allegheny, Pennsylvania</p>
<p class="p143">Colporteur work begins</p>
<p class="p144">Articles such as “Wanted 1,000 Preachers” and “Anointed to Preach” promote the ministry</p>
<p class="p145">Christians who are not yet doing so are encouraged to begin holding meetings regularly</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p146"><strong>1882</strong></p>
<p class="p147">An article refuting the Trinity doctrine is published</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p148"><strong>1885</strong></p>
<p class="p149">Watch Tower publications reach readers on five continents</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p150"><strong>1886</strong></p>
<p class="p151"><em>The Divine Plan of the Ages </em>is released, the first volume of the series of books later known as <em>Studies in the Scriptures</em></p>
<p class="p152">The <em>Watch Tower </em>invites readers to a three-day “general meeting” to follow the Memorial of Christ’s death, thus beginning the practice of holding annual conventions</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p153"><strong>1889</strong></p>
<p class="p154">The Bible House is built in Allegheny, Pennsylvania</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p155"><strong>1890</strong></p>
<p class="p156">The Watch Tower Society publishes Rotherham’s <em>New Testament, </em>using a secular printing company</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p157"><strong>1891</strong></p>
<p class="p158">C. T. Russell begins extensive tours outside the United States, seeking ways of “forwarding the spread of the Truth”</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p159"><strong>1894</strong></p>
<p class="p160">Tower Tract Society representatives, acting as traveling overseers, are sent out to visit and encourage congregations</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p161"><strong>1895</strong></p>
<p class="p162">The <em>Watch Tower </em>notes that some faithful ones are holding “Dawn Circles” for Bible study and recommends “the holding of these Circles everywhere”</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p163"><strong>1896</strong></p>
<p class="p164">C. T. Russell publishes the booklet <em>What Say the Scriptures About Hell?</em></p>
</li>
<li><p class="p165"><strong>1900</strong></p>
<p class="p166">First branch office established in London, England</p>
<p class="p167">Preaching work reaches 28 countries</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p168"><strong>1903</strong></p>
<p class="p169">Distribution of free tracts on Sundays, which had taken place on streets near churches, shifts to intense house-to-house campaigns</p>
<p class="p170">Russell’s sermons begin to appear regularly in newspapers</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p171"><strong>1909</strong></p>
<p class="p172">The headquarters of the Watch Tower Society moves to Brooklyn, New York</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p173"><strong>1910</strong></p>
<p class="p174">The Bible Students begin to use the name International Bible Students Association</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p175"><strong>1911-1912</strong></p>
<p class="p176">C. T. Russell and six companions travel some 35,000 miles (56,000 km) on a round-the-world tour to investigate the “status and prospects of Christianity” in various lands, including China, India, Japan, and the Philippines</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p177"><strong>1914</strong></p>
<p class="p178">The “Photo-Drama of Creation” is first shown in New York on January 11, then in five other cities within the next month. By the end of the year, it is seen in various forms by close to 9,000,000 people in North America, Europe, Australia, and New Zealand</p>
<p class="p179">In October, C. T. Russell announces to the Bethel family: “The Gentile times have ended; their kings have had their day.” According to a sister in attendance, he added: “So we know not what awaits us”</p>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016370.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***snnw song 144 It Means Their Life***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 144</p>
<h1><strong>It Means Their Life</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Ezekiel 3:17-19</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             In this year of goodwill</p>
<p class="p8">by our God, all need to hear</p>
<p class="p9">That the day of his anger</p>
<p class="p10">will come, and it is near.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p11">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p12">It means their life, but not just theirs;</p>
<p class="p13">It means our own life as well.</p>
<p class="p14">It means their life if they obey,</p>
<p class="p15">So all the nations we must tell;</p>
<p class="p16">We must tell.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p17">             There’s a message to preach,</p>
<p class="p18">so we spread it all abroad.</p>
<p class="p19">We invite all to come and</p>
<p class="p20">be reconciled to God.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p21">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p22">It means their life, but not just theirs;</p>
<p class="p23">It means our own life as well.</p>
<p class="p24">It means their life if they obey,</p>
<p class="p25">So all the nations we must tell;</p>
<p class="p26">We must tell.</p>
</div>
<p class="p27">(BRIDGE)</p>
<p class="p28">It’s urgent, it’s important,</p>
<p class="p29">That people listen, learn, and live.</p>
<p class="p30">We tell them, and we teach them;</p>
<p class="p31">Life-giving truth we freely give.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p32">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p33">It means their life, but not just theirs;</p>
<p class="p34">It means our own life as well.</p>
<p class="p35">It means their life if they obey,</p>
<p class="p36">So all the nations we must tell;</p>
<p class="p37">We must tell.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p38">(See also <span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">2 Chron. 36:15;</a><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"> Isa. 61:2;</a><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"> Ezek. 33:6;</a><span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90"> 2 Thess. 1:8</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <strong>(Ezek. 3:17-19)</strong></a> “Son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them from me. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>When I say to someone wicked, ‘You will surely die,’ but you do not warn him, and you fail to speak in order to warn the wicked one to turn from his wicked course so that he may stay alive, he will die for his error because he is wicked, but I will ask his blood back from you.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But if you warn someone wicked and he does not turn back from his wickedness and from his wicked course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “I will hold you accountable for his blood.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <strong>(2 Chron. 36:15)</strong></a> Jehovah the God of their forefathers kept warning them by means of his messengers, warning them again and again, because he felt compassion for his people and for his dwelling place.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <strong>(Isa. 61:2)</strong></a> To proclaim the year of Jehovah’s goodwill* And the day of vengeance of our God, To comfort all who mourn,</p><p></p><p>Or “favor.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(Ezek. 33:6)</strong></a> “‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and he does not blow the horn and the people receive no warning and a sword comes and takes the life* of one of them, that person will die for his own error, but I will ask his blood back from the watchman.’*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “I will hold the watchman accountable for his blood.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <strong>(2 Thess. 1:8)</strong></a> in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
