<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 “Train a Boy in the Way He Should Go”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016373.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:1-26:28)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A good name* is to be chosen rather than great wealth; To be respected* is better than silver and gold.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The rich and the poor have this in common:* Jehovah made them both.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself, But the inexperienced keep right on going and suffer the consequences.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah Is riches and glory and life.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Thorns and traps are in the crooked man’s path, But whoever values his life* keeps far away from them.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Train a boy* in the way he should go; Even when he grows old he will not depart from it.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The rich one rules the poor, And the borrower is a slave to the lender.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whoever sows unrighteousness will reap disaster, And the rod of his fury will come to its end.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The generous person* will be blessed, For he shares his food with the poor. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Drive away the scornful man, And contention will disappear; Disputes* and insults will cease. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The one who loves a pure heart and whose speech is gracious Will have the king as his friend. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The eyes of Jehovah safeguard knowledge, But He overturns the words of the treacherous. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The lazy one says: “There is a lion outside! I will be killed in the middle of the public square!” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The mouth of wayward* women is a deep pit. The one condemned by Jehovah will fall into it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a boy,* But the rod of discipline will remove it far from him. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The one defrauding the poor to increase his wealth And the one giving gifts to the rich Will end up in poverty. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise, In order to apply your heart to my knowledge, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For it is pleasant to keep them deep within you, So that all of them may constantly be on your lips. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For your confidence to be in Jehovah, I am giving you knowledge today. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Have I not already written you, Imparting advice and knowledge, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>To teach you true and reliable words, So that you can return with an accurate report to the one who sent you? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Do not rob the poor man because he is poor, And do not crush the lowly man in the city gate, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For Jehovah himself will plead their cause And he will take the life* of those who defraud them. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Do not keep company with a hot-tempered man Or get involved with one disposed to rage, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So that you never learn his ways And ensnare yourself.* <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Do not be among those who shake hands in a pledge, Who put up security for loans. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>If you have nothing to pay, Your bed will be taken right out from under you! <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not move an ancient boundary marker That your forefathers put in place. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Have you seen a man skillful at his work? He will stand before kings; He will not stand before common men. </p><p><strong>23 </strong>When you sit down to eat with a king, Carefully consider what is before you;  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Put a knife to your throat* If you have a large appetite.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not crave his delicacies, For it is deceptive food.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth. Stop and show understanding.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>When you cast your eyes on it, it is not there, For it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not eat the food of a stingy person;* Do not crave his delicacies,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For he is like one keeping accounts.* “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but he does not mean it.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You will vomit up the morsels you have eaten And will have wasted your compliments.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not speak in the ears of the stupid one, For he will despise the wisdom of your words. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Do not move an ancient boundary marker Or encroach on the field of the fatherless. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For their Defender* is strong; He will take up their cause against you. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Apply your heart to discipline And your ear to the sayings of knowledge. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Do not hold back discipline from a boy.* If you strike him with the rod, he will not die. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With the rod you should strike him, In order to save him* from the Grave.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My son, if your heart becomes wise, Then my own heart will rejoice. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>My innermost being* will find joy When your lips speak what is right. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let your heart not envy sinners, But be in the fear of Jehovah all day long, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For then you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Listen, my son, and become wise, And direct your heart in the right way. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Do not be among those who drink too much wine, Among those who gorge themselves on meat, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>For a drunkard and a glutton will come to poverty, And drowsiness will clothe one with rags. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Listen to your father who caused your birth, And do not despise your mother just because she has grown old. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Buy* truth and never sell it, Also wisdom and discipline and understanding. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The father of a righteous one will surely be joyful; Whoever fathers a wise son will rejoice in him. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Your father and your mother will rejoice, And she who gave birth to you will be joyful. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>My son, do give your heart to me, And may your eyes take pleasure in my ways. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For a prostitute is a deep pit, And an immoral* woman is a narrow well. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>She lies in wait like a robber; She increases the number of unfaithful men. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Who has woe? Who has uneasiness? Who has quarrels? Who has complaints? Who has wounds for no reason? Who has bleary* eyes? <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Those lingering long over wine; Those searching out* mixed wine. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not look at the wine’s red color As it sparkles in the cup and goes down smoothly, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For in the end it bites like a serpent, And it secretes poison like a viper. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Your eyes will see strange things, And your heart will speak perverse things. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>And you will be like one lying down in the middle of the sea, Like one lying at the top of a ship’s mast. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>You will say: “They have struck me, but I did not feel it.* They beat me, but I did not know it. When will I wake up? I need another drink.”* </p><p><strong>24 </strong>Do not envy evil men, And do not crave their company,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For their heart meditates on violence, And their lips speak of trouble.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>By wisdom a house* is built up, And by discernment it is made secure.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>By knowledge its rooms are filled With all sorts of precious and pleasant treasures.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A wise man is powerful, And with knowledge a man increases his power.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By skillful direction* you will wage your war, And through many advisers* there is victory.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>True wisdom is unattainable for a fool; He has nothing to say in the city gate.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Anyone who plots evil Will be called a master schemer.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Foolish schemes* are sinful, And people detest a ridiculer. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>If you become discouraged in the day of distress,* Your strength will be meager. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Rescue those who are being taken away to death, And hold back those staggering to the slaughter. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If you say, “But we did not know about this,” Does not the One who examines hearts* discern it? Yes, the One who watches you* will know And will repay each man according to his activity. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>My son, eat honey, because it is good; Honey from the comb is sweet to the taste. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you.* If you find it, you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Do not wickedly lie in ambush near the home of the righteous one; Do not destroy his place of rest. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>When your enemy falls, do not rejoice, And when he stumbles, do not let your heart be joyful; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Otherwise, Jehovah will see and be displeased, And He will turn away his anger from him.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Do not be upset* because of evil men; Do not envy wicked people, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>For there is no future for anyone evil; The lamp of the wicked will be extinguished. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, fear Jehovah and the king. And do not associate with dissenters,* <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For their disaster will arise suddenly. Who knows what ruin both* will bring upon them? <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>These sayings also belong to the wise: Partiality in judgment is not good. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Whoever says to the wicked one, “You are righteous,” Will be cursed by the peoples and denounced by the nations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But it will go well for those reproving him; Blessings of good things will come upon them. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>People will kiss the lips of the one replying honestly.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Prepare your outside work, and get everything ready in the field; Then build your house.* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not testify against your neighbor without grounds. Do not use your lips to deceive others. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not say: “I will do to him just as he has done to me; I will repay him for what he did.”* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>I passed by the field of the lazy one, By the vineyard of the man lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I saw that it was overgrown with weeds; The ground was covered with nettles, And its stone wall was broken down. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>I observed this and took it to heart; I saw it and learned this lesson:* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man. </p><p><strong>25 </strong>These also are the proverbs of Solʹo·mon, which the men of Hez·e·kiʹah the king of Judah transcribed:*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is the glory of God to keep a matter secret, And the glory of kings is to search through a matter.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>As the heavens are high and the earth is deep, So the heart of kings is unsearchable.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Remove the dross from the silver, And it will emerge completely refined.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Remove the wicked one from the king’s presence, And his throne will be firmly established in righteousness.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not honor yourself before the king, And do not take a place among the prominent,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” Than to humiliate you in the presence of a noble.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not rush into a legal dispute, For what will you do later if your neighbor humiliates you?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Plead your case with your neighbor, But do not reveal what you were told confidentially,* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So that the one listening will not put you to shame And you spread a bad report* that cannot be recalled. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Like apples of gold in silver carvings* Is a word spoken at the right time. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Like an earring of gold and an ornament of fine gold Is a wise reprover to the receptive ear. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Just like the coldness of snow on the day of harvest Is a faithful messenger to those who sent him, For he refreshes his master.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like clouds and wind that bring no rain Is a man who boasts about a gift never given.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>By patience a commander is won over, And a gentle* tongue can break a bone. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>If you find honey, eat only what you need, For if you take too much, you may vomit it up. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Rarely set foot in your neighbor’s house, So that he does not get tired of you and hate you. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Like a war club and a sword and a sharp arrow Is a man bearing false witness against his neighbor. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Like a broken tooth or an unsteady foot Is confidence in an unreliable* person in times of trouble. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Like one who removes a garment on a cold day And like vinegar poured on soda* Is the one who sings songs to a gloomy heart. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>If your enemy* is hungry, give him bread to eat; If he is thirsty, give him water to drink, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For you will be heaping burning coals on his head,* And Jehovah will reward you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The north wind brings a downpour, And a gossiping tongue brings an angry face. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Better to dwell on a corner of the roof Than in the same house with a quarrelsome* wife. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Like cold water on a tired soul* Is a good report from a distant land. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Like a muddied spring and a ruined well Is a righteous person who gives in to* a wicked one. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>It is not good to eat too much honey, Nor is it glorious to seek one’s own glory. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>As a city broken through, without a wall, Is the man who cannot control his temper.* </p><p><strong>26 </strong>Like snow in summer and rain at harvesttime, Honor is not fitting for someone stupid.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Just as a bird has reason to flee and a swallow to fly, So a curse does not come without a real reason.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>A whip is for the horse, a bridle is for the donkey, And the rod is for the back of stupid people.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not answer the stupid one according to his foolishness, So that you do not put yourself on his level.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Answer the stupid one according to his foolishness, So that he does not think he is wise.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Like someone who cripples his own feet and harms himself* Is the one who entrusts matters to someone stupid.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Like the limp* legs of the lame, So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Like tying a stone to a sling, So is giving glory to someone stupid.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Like a thorn plant that comes into the hand of a drunkard, So is a proverb in the mouth of stupid people. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Like an archer who wounds at random,* So is the one who hires the stupid one or those passing by. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Like a dog that returns to its vomit, The stupid one repeats his foolishness. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Have you seen a man who thinks he is wise? There is more hope for someone stupid than for him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The lazy one says: “There is a young lion in the road, A lion in the public square!” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A door keeps turning on its hinges,* And the lazy one on his bed. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl, But he is too tired to bring it back to his mouth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The lazy one thinks he is wiser Than seven people who give a sensible reply. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Like someone grabbing hold of a dog’s ears Is the one passing by who becomes furious about* a quarrel that is not his. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Like a madman who shoots fiery missiles, arrows, and death* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Is the man who plays a trick on his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Where there is no wood, the fire goes out, And where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>As charcoal for the embers and wood for the fire, So a contentious man kindles a quarrel. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;* They are gulped right down into the stomach. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Like a silver glazing over a piece of earthenware Are affectionate words from* an evil heart. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The one who hates others disguises it with his lips, But inside he harbors deceit. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Although he speaks graciously, do not trust him, For there are seven detestable things in his heart.* <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Though his hatred is concealed by deceit, His evil will be exposed in the congregation. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one who digs a pit will fall into it, And whoever rolls away a stone—it will come back on him. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A lying tongue hates those crushed by it, And a flattering mouth causes ruin.</p><p></p><p>Or “A good reputation.” Lit., “A name.”</p><p>Lit., “Favor.”</p><p>Lit., “meet together.”</p><p>Or “penalty.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Lit., “He with a good eye.”</p><p>Or “Lawsuits.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Or “rob the soul.”</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “Restrain yourself.”</p><p>Or “a soul full of desire.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Cease from your own understanding.”</p><p>Or “of anyone whose eye is evil.”</p><p>Or “calculating in his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “his heart is not with you.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeemer.”</p><p>Or “child; youth.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “My kidneys.”</p><p>Or “Acquire.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “dullness of.”</p><p>Or “who gather to try out.”</p><p>Or “I felt no pain.”</p><p>Or “I will seek it again.”</p><p>Or “household.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Or “success; salvation.”</p><p>Or “The schemes of a fool.”</p><p>Or “in times of trouble.”</p><p>Or “motives.”</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “is sweet to your soul.”</p><p>That is, the enemy.</p><p>Or “show yourself heated up.”</p><p>Or “those who are for a change.”</p><p>That is, Jehovah and the king.</p><p>Or possibly, “Replying in a straight­forward way is like giving a kiss.”</p><p>Or “household.”</p><p>Or “I will get even with him.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Lit., “I took the discipline:”</p><p>Or “copied and compiled.”</p><p>Or “the secrets of others.”</p><p>Or “a malicious rumor.”</p><p>Or “settings.”</p><p>Or “the soul of his master.”</p><p>Lit., “a gift of falsehood.”</p><p>Or “mild.”</p><p>Or possibly, “a treacherous.”</p><p>Or “alkali.”</p><p>Lit., “the one hating you.”</p><p>That is, to soften the person and melt his hardness.</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “compromises with.” Lit., “staggers before.”</p><p>Or “who has no restraint for his spirit.”</p><p>Or possibly, “So an undeserved curse does not come to pass.”</p><p>Or “So that you do not make yourself his equal.”</p><p>Lit., “drinks violence.”</p><p>Or “dangling.”</p><p>Or “who wounds everyone.”</p><p>Or “pivot.”</p><p>Or possibly, “who meddles in.”</p><p>Or “deadly arrows.”</p><p>Or “like things to be swallowed greedily.”</p><p>Lit., “fervent lips with.”</p><p>Or “For his heart is completely detestable.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
