<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 “Do Not Let Your Heart Turn Aside”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016366.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:1-11:31)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>My son, keep my sayings, And treasure up my commandments.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Keep my commandments and live; Guard my instruction* like the pupil of your eye.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Tie them around your fingers; Write them on the tablet of your heart.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>To guard you against the wayward* woman, Against the immoral* woman and her smooth* words.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>From the window of my house, Through my lattice, I looked down,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And as I observed the naive* ones, I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He passed along the street near her corner, And he marched in the direction of her house  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>In the twilight, in the evening, At the approach of night and darkness. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then I saw a woman meet him, Dressed like* a prostitute, with a cunning heart. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>She is loud and defiant. She never stays* at home. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares, She lurks near every corner. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you! <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>And now, my sons, listen to me; Pay attention to the words I speak. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For she has caused many to fall down slain, And those she has killed are numerous. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Her house leads to the Grave;* It goes down to the inner chambers of death. </p><p><strong>8 </strong>Is not wisdom calling out? Is not discernment raising its voice?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>On the heights along the road, It takes its position at the crossroads.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Next to the gates leading into the city, At the entrances of the doorways, It keeps crying out loudly:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“To you, O people, I am calling; I raise my voice to everyone.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You inexperienced ones, learn shrewdness; You stupid ones, acquire an understanding heart.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Listen, for what I say is important, My lips speak what is right;  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For my mouth softly utters truth, And my lips detest what is wicked.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All the sayings of my mouth are righteous. None of them are twisted or crooked.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They are all straightforward to the discerning And right to those who have found knowledge. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Take my discipline instead of silver, And knowledge rather than the finest gold, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For wisdom is better than corals;* All other desirable things cannot compare to it. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness; I have found knowledge and thinking ability. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I possess good advice and practical wisdom; Understanding and power are mine. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>By me kings keep reigning, And high officials decree righteousness. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>By me princes keep ruling, And nobles judge in righteousness. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I love those loving me, And those seeking me will find me. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Riches and glory are with me, Lasting wealth* and righteousness. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold, And what I produce is better than the finest silver. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I walk in the path of righteousness, In the middle of the pathways of justice; <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>I give a rich inheritance to those who love me, And I fill up their storehouses. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way, The earliest of his achievements of long ago. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>From ancient times* I was installed, From the start, from times earlier than the earth. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth,* When there were no springs overflowing with water. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Before the mountains were set in place, Before the hills, I was brought forth, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When he had not yet made the earth and its fields Or the first clods of earth’s soil. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When he prepared the heavens, I was there; When he marked out the horizon* on the surface of the waters, <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>When he established* the clouds above, When he founded the fountains of the deep, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>When he set a decree for the sea That its waters should not pass beyond his order, When he established* the foundations of the earth, <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then I was beside him as a master worker. I was the one he was especially fond of day by day; I rejoiced before him all the time; <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I rejoiced over his habitable earth, And I was especially fond of the sons of men.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>And now, my sons, listen to me; Yes, happy are those who keep my ways. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Listen to discipline and become wise, And never neglect it. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who listens to me By coming early to* my doors day by day, By waiting next to my doorposts; <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For the one finding me will find life, And he receives approval from Jehovah. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But the one who ignores me harms himself,* And those who hate me love death.” </p><p><strong>9 </strong>True wisdom has built its house; It has carved* out its seven pillars.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It has fully prepared its meat;* It has mixed its wine; It has also arranged its table.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It has sent out its female servants To call out from the heights above the city:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to the one lacking good sense:*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>“Come, eat my bread And share in drinking the wine that I have mixed.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Leave behind your inexperience* and live; Walk forward in the way of understanding.”  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor, And whoever reproves someone wicked will get hurt.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser. Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For by me your days will be many, And years will be added to your life. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage, But if you are a ridiculer, you alone will bear it. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A stupid woman is loud. She is ignorant and knows absolutely nothing. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>She sits at the entrance of her house On a seat in the high places of the city, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Calling out to those passing by, To those walking straight ahead on their way: <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to those lacking good sense:* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“Stolen waters are sweet, And food eaten in secret is pleasant.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But he does not know that those powerless in death are there, That her guests are in the depths of the Grave.* </p><p><strong>10 </strong>Proverbs of Solʹo·mon. A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The treasures gained by wickedness will be of no benefit, But righteousness is what rescues from death.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah will not cause the righteous one* to go hungry, But he will deny the wicked what they crave.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Idle hands will cause poverty, But diligent hands bring riches.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The son acting with insight gathers the crop in summer, But the son acting shamefully is fast asleep during the harvest.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Blessings are on the head of the righteous one, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The memory* of the righteous one is due for a blessing, But the name of the wicked will rot.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The wisehearted person will accept instructions,* But the one speaking foolishly will be trodden down.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The one walking in integrity will walk in security, But the one making his ways crooked will be found out. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The one who slyly winks his eye causes grief, And the one who speaks foolishly will be trodden down. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Hatred is what stirs up contentions, But love covers over all transgressions. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning person, But the rod is for the back of one lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Those who are wise treasure up knowledge, But the mouth of the fool invites ruin. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The wealth* of a rich man is his fortified city. The ruin of the poor is their poverty. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The activity of the righteous one leads to life; But the produce of the wicked one leads to sin. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who heeds discipline is a path to life,* But the one who ignores reproof leads others astray. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The one who conceals his hatred speaks lies, And the one spreading malicious reports* is stupid. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When words are many, transgression cannot be avoided, But whoever controls his lips acts discreetly. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The tongue of the righteous one is like the finest silver, But the heart of the wicked one is worth little. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The lips of the righteous one nourish* many, But the foolish die for lack of sense. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, And He adds no pain* with it. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one, But wisdom is for the man of discernment. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>What the wicked one fears will come upon him; But the desire of the righteous will be granted. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>When the storm passes by, the wicked one will be no more, But the righteous one is a foundation forever. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, So the lazy person is to the one who sends him.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah prolongs life, But the years of the wicked will be cut short. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The expectation* of the righteous brings joy, But the hope of the wicked will perish. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The way of Jehovah is a stronghold for the blameless one, But it means ruin for evildoers. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The righteous one will never be made to fall, But the wicked will no longer inhabit the earth. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The mouth of the righteous one produces* wisdom, But the perverse tongue will be cut off. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The lips of the righteous one know what is pleasing, But the mouth of the wicked is perverse. </p><p><strong>11 </strong>Dishonest* scales are detestable to Jehovah, But an accurate weight* brings pleasure to him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow, But wisdom is with the modest ones.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The integrity of the upright is what guides them, But the deviousness of the treacherous will destroy them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Wealth* will be of no benefit on the day of fury, But righteousness is what will rescue from death.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The righteousness of the blameless one makes his path straight, But the wicked one will fall because of his own wickedness.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The righteousness of the upright will rescue them, But the treacherous will be caught by their own desires.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When a wicked man dies, his hope perishes; And expectations based on his power also perish.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The righteous one is rescued from distress, And the wicked one takes his place.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>By his mouth the apostate* brings his neighbor to ruin, But by knowledge the righteous are rescued. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The goodness of the righteous makes a city rejoice, And when the wicked perish, there is a joyful cry. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Because of the blessing of the upright a city is exalted, But the mouth of the wicked tears it down. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Whoever is lacking good sense* shows contempt for* his neighbor, But the man of true discernment remains silent. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk, But the trustworthy person* keeps a confidence.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When there is no skillful direction,* the people fall, But there is success* through many advisers.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Whoever guarantees a loan* for a stranger is sure to fare badly, But whoever avoids* shaking hands in a pledge will be secure. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A gracious* woman acquires glory, But ruthless men seize riches. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>A kind man* benefits himself,* But the cruel person brings trouble* on himself. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The wicked one earns deceptive wages, But the one who sows righteousness receives a true reward. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The one standing firmly for righteousness is in line for life, But the one chasing after evil is in line for death. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah, But those whose way is blameless bring pleasure to him. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Be assured of this:* An evil person will not go unpunished, But the children of the righteous will escape. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Like a gold ring in the snout of a pig Is a beautiful woman who rejects good sense. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The desire of the righteous leads to good, But what the wicked hope for leads to fury. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>One gives generously* and ends up with more; Another withholds what should be given, but he comes to poverty. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The generous person* will prosper,* And whoever refreshes* others will himself be refreshed. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The people will curse the one who withholds grain, But they will bless the one who sells it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one who diligently seeks to do good seeks favor, But the one searching for bad—that is what will surely come upon him. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The one trusting in his riches will fall, But the righteous will flourish like the foliage. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Anyone who brings trouble* on his household will inherit the wind, And the fool will be a servant to the wisehearted one. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life, And the one who wins souls* is wise. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>If, indeed, the righteous one on earth is rewarded, How much more the wicked one and the sinner!</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “with the garment of.”</p><p>Lit., “Her feet never stay.”</p><p>Or “fetters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “to the sons of men.”</p><p>Lit., “understand heart.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Hereditary values.”</p><p>Or “From time immemorial.”</p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Lit., “a circle.”</p><p>Lit., “made strong.”</p><p>Or “decreed.”</p><p>Or “mankind.”</p><p>Or “By keeping awake at.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “hewed.”</p><p>Lit., “She has slaughtered her slaughtering.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “the inexperienced ones.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the soul of the righteous one.”</p><p>Or “reputation.”</p><p>Lit., “commandments.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “valuable thing.”</p><p>Or possibly, “is on the path to life.”</p><p>Or “rumors.”</p><p>Or “guide.”</p><p>Or “sorrow; hardship.”</p><p>Or “to his employer.”</p><p>Or “hope.”</p><p>Or “bears the fruit of.”</p><p>Or “Cheating.”</p><p>Or “a complete stone weight.”</p><p>Or “Valuable things.”</p><p>Or “godless man.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “despises.”</p><p>Lit., “the one faithful in spirit.”</p><p>Lit., “covers over a matter.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “salvation.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Or “puts up security.”</p><p>Lit., “hates.”</p><p>Or “charming.”</p><p>Or “A man of loyal love.”</p><p>Or “does good to his soul.”</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p><p>Lit., “scatters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “will be made fat.”</p><p>Lit., “freely waters.”</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016366.xhtml#citationsource3">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:1-27)</strong></a> <span id="citation3"></span>My son, keep my sayings, And treasure up my commandments.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Keep my commandments and live; Guard my instruction* like the pupil of your eye.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Tie them around your fingers; Write them on the tablet of your heart.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>To guard you against the wayward* woman, Against the immoral* woman and her smooth* words.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>From the window of my house, Through my lattice, I looked down,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And as I observed the naive* ones, I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He passed along the street near her corner, And he marched in the direction of her house  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>In the twilight, in the evening, At the approach of night and darkness. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then I saw a woman meet him, Dressed like* a prostitute, with a cunning heart. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>She is loud and defiant. She never stays* at home. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares, She lurks near every corner. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you! <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>And now, my sons, listen to me; Pay attention to the words I speak. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For she has caused many to fall down slain, And those she has killed are numerous. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Her house leads to the Grave;* It goes down to the inner chambers of death.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “with the garment of.”</p><p>Lit., “Her feet never stay.”</p><p>Or “fetters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
