<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 October 17-23</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016367.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 12:1-16:33)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>The one who loves discipline loves knowledge, But the one who hates reproof is unreasoning.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The good person obtains Jehovah’s approval, But He condemns the man of wicked schemes.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>No man is made secure by wickedness, But the righteous will never be uprooted.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A capable wife is a crown to her husband, But the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The thoughts of the righteous are just, But the guidance of the wicked is deceptive.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush,* But the mouth of the upright saves them.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When the wicked are overthrown, they are no more, But the house of the righteous will keep standing.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>A man is praised for the discretion of his mouth, But one with a twisted heart will be treated with contempt.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servant Than to glorify oneself and have no food.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals,* But even the mercy of the wicked is cruel. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The one who cultivates his land will be satisfied with food, But the one pursuing worthless things is lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The wicked man envies what other evil men have caught, But the root of the righteous bears fruit. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The evil man is ensnared by his own sinful speech, But the righteous one escapes from distress. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of his speech* a man is satisfied with good, And the work of his hands will reward him. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The way of the fool is right in his own eyes, But the wise one accepts advice.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A fool immediately* shows his annoyance, But the shrewd man overlooks* an insult. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth,* But a false witness speaks deceit. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, But the tongue of the wise is a healing. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Truthful lips will endure forever, But a lying tongue will last for only a moment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Deceit is in the heart of those who plot mischief, But those who promote* peace have joy. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>No harm will befall the righteous one, But the wicked will have their fill of calamity. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Lying lips are detestable to Jehovah, But those acting faithfully bring pleasure to him. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A shrewd man conceals what he knows, But the heart of the fool blurts out his foolishness. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The hand of the diligent ones will rule, But idle hands will be put to forced labor. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,* But a good word cheers it up. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The righteous one searches out his pastures, But the course of the wicked leads them astray. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The lazy do not chase after the prey, But diligence is a man’s precious treasure. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The path of righteousness leads to life; Along its pathway there is no death. </p><p><strong>13 </strong>A wise son accepts his father’s discipline, But the scoffer does not listen to a rebuke.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of his speech* a man will eat what is good, But the very desire* of the treacherous is for violence.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The one guarding his mouth* protects his life,* But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The lazy person has his cravings, yet he* has nothing, But the diligent one* will be fully satisfied.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The righteous one hates lies, But the actions of the wicked bring shame and disgrace.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Righteousness protects the one whose way is innocent, But wickedness brings down the sinner.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing; There is another who pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Riches are the ransom for a man’s life,* But the poor are not even threatened.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The light of the righteous shines brightly,* But the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Presumptuousness leads only to strife, But wisdom belongs to those who seek advice.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Wealth quickly gained* will dwindle, But the wealth of the one who gathers it little by little* will increase. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Expectation* postponed makes the heart sick, But a desire realized is a tree of life. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Whoever despises instruction* will pay the penalty, But the one who respects the commandment will be rewarded. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The teaching* of the wise one is a source of life To turn one away from the snares of death. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Keen insight wins favor, But the way of the treacherous is harsh. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The shrewd person acts with knowledge, But the fool exposes his own foolishness. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>A wicked messenger falls into trouble, But a faithful envoy brings healing. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Whoever neglects discipline comes to poverty and disgrace, But the one accepting correction* will be glorified. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Desire when realized is sweet to a person,* But the stupid hate to turn away from bad. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one walking with the wise will become wise, But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Calamity pursues sinners, But prosperity rewards the righteous. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The good person leaves an inheritance to his grandchildren, But the sinner’s wealth will be stored up for the righteous one. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The plowed field of the poor yields much food, But it* may be swept away by injustice. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Whoever holds back his rod* hates his son, But the one who loves him disciplines him diligently.* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The righteous one eats and satisfies his appetite,* But the stomach of the wicked is empty. </p><p><strong>14 </strong>The truly wise woman builds up her house, But the foolish one tears it down with her own hands.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah, But the one whose ways are devious* despises Him.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The rod of haughtiness is in the mouth of the fool, But the lips of the wise will protect them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Where there are no cattle the manger is clean, But the power of a bull yields an abundant harvest.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A faithful witness will not lie, But a false witness lies with every breath.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none, But knowledge comes easily to the person with understanding.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Stay away from the foolish man, For you will not find knowledge on his lips.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going, But the stupid are deceived* by their foolishness.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Fools make fun of guilt,* But among the upright, there is a willingness to reconcile.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The heart knows its own bitterness,* And no outsider can share in its joy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The house of the wicked will be destroyed, But the tent of the upright will flourish. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Even in laughter the heart may feel pain, And rejoicing may end in grief. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The one wayward at heart will reap the results of his ways, But the good man reaps the reward of his dealings. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The naive* person believes every word, But the shrewd one ponders each step. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The wise one is cautious and turns away from evil, But the stupid one is reckless* and overconfident. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who is quick to anger acts foolishly, But the man who thinks things out* is hated. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The naive* will inherit foolishness, But the shrewd are crowned with knowledge. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Bad people will have to bow down before the good, And the wicked will bow at the gates of the righteous. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The poor man is hated even by his neighbors, But many are the friends of the rich person. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The one who despises his neighbor sins, But whoever shows compassion to the lowly is happy. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Will not those who plot mischief go astray? But those intent on doing good will receive loyal love and faithfulness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>There is benefit in every kind of hard work, But mere talk leads to want. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The crown of the wise is their wealth; But the foolishness of the stupid is only foolishness. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>A true witness saves lives,* But a deceitful one lies with every breath. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah, And it will be a refuge for his children. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, To turn one away from the snares of death. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A multitude of people are a king’s majesty, But a ruler without subjects is ruined. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, But the impatient one displays his foolishness. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>A calm heart gives life* to the body, But jealousy is rottenness to the bones. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker, But whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The wicked one will be brought down by his own evil, But the righteous one will find refuge in his integrity. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Wisdom rests quietly in the heart of an understanding person, But among the stupid it must make itself known. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Righteousness exalts a nation, But sin is disgraceful to a people. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The king finds pleasure in a servant who acts with insight, But his fury is against the one who acts shamefully. </p><p><strong>15 </strong>A mild* answer turns away rage, But a harsh* word stirs up anger.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The tongue of the wise makes good use of knowledge, But the mouth of the stupid blurts out foolishness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere, Watching both the bad and the good.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A calm tongue* is a tree of life, But twisted speech causes despair.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A fool disrespects his father’s discipline, But a shrewd person accepts correction.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In the house of the righteous one there is abundant treasure, But the produce* of the wicked one brings him trouble.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The lips of the wise spread knowledge, But not so the heart of the stupid one.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah, But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah detests the way of the wicked one, But he loves the one who pursues righteousness. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Discipline seems bad* to one forsaking the way, But whoever hates reproof will die. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The Grave* and the place of destruction* are in full view of Jehovah. How much more so the hearts of men! <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The scoffer does not love the one correcting* him. He will not consult the wise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A joyful heart makes for a cheerful countenance, But heartache crushes the spirit. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The understanding heart seeks knowledge, But the mouth of the stupid feeds on* foolishness. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All the days of the afflicted one are bad, But the one with a cheerful* heart has a continual feast. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Better is a little in the fear of Jehovah Than great wealth along with anxiety.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Better is a dish of vegetables where there is love Than a fattened* bull where there is hatred. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A hot-tempered man stirs up strife, But one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns, But the path of the upright is like a level highway. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a stupid man despises his mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense,* But the man of discernment walks straight ahead. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Plans fail when there is no consultation,* But there is accomplishment through many advisers.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A man rejoices in giving the right answer,* And a word spoken at the right time—how good it is! <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The path of life leads upward to one with insight, To turn him away from the Grave* below. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty, But he will preserve the boundary of the widow. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one, But pleasant sayings are pure to Him. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one making dishonest profit brings trouble* on his own household, But the one hating bribes will keep living. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering,* But the mouth of the wicked blurts out bad things. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Jehovah is far away from the wicked, But he hears the prayer of the righteous. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Bright eyes make* the heart rejoice; A good report invigorates the bones.* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The one who listens to life-giving reproof Is at home among the wise. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone refusing discipline despises his life,* But whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom, And before glory there is humility. </p><p><strong>16 </strong>A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,* But the answer he gives* is from Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right* to him, But Jehovah examines the motives.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,* And your plans will succeed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured* that he will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways, He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Better is a little with righteousness Than a large income without justice.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A man may plot out his course in his heart, But it is Jehovah who directs his steps. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Inspired* decision should be on the lips of a king; He must never betray justice. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah; All the weights in the bag are his doing. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Wicked practices are detestable to kings, For the throne is firmly established by righteousness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings. They love someone who speaks honestly. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The king’s rage is like a messenger of death, But the wise man appeases* it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>In the light of the king’s face there is life; His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Better to be humble* among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,* And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul* and a healing to the bones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The appetite* of a laborer makes him work hard For his hunger* urges him on. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A worthless man digs up what is bad; His speech is like a scorching fire. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A troublemaker* causes dissension, And a slanderer separates close friends. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>A violent man entices his neighbor And leads him in the wrong way. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>He winks his eye as he schemes harm. He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Gray hair is a crown of beauty* When it is found in the way of righteousness. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, And the one controlling his temper* than one conquering a city. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The lot is cast into the lap, But every decision by it is from Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “has no sense.”</p><p>Lit., “lie in wait for blood.”</p><p>Lit., “bread.”</p><p>Or “the soul of his domestic animal.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “counsel.”</p><p>Or “in the same day.”</p><p>Lit., “covers over.”</p><p>Lit., “what is righteous.”</p><p>Lit., “those who are counselors of.”</p><p>Or “depresses him.”</p><p>Or “correction.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “what he says.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “will be made fat.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “hear no rebuke.”</p><p>Lit., “rejoices.”</p><p>Or “those consulting together.”</p><p>Or “Wealth from vanity.”</p><p>Lit., “gathers by hand.”</p><p>Or “Hope.”</p><p>Or “the word.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “reproof.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “he.”</p><p>Or “discipline; punishment.”</p><p>Or possibly, “promptly.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “crooked.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the stupid deceive others.”</p><p>Or “of making amends.”</p><p>Or “there is goodwill.”</p><p>Or “the bitterness of its soul.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Or “furious.”</p><p>Or “the man of thinking abilities.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “health.”</p><p>Or “gentle.”</p><p>Or “painful.”</p><p>Or “A tongue of healing.”</p><p>Lit., “the crushing of the spirit.”</p><p>Or “reproof.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “severe.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “and Abaddon.”</p><p>Or “reproving.”</p><p>Or “pursues.”</p><p>Or “good.”</p><p>Or “confusion.”</p><p>Lit., “manger-fed.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “confidential talk.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Lit., “in the answer of his mouth.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>Or “carefully considers how to answer; thinks before speaking.”</p><p>Or “A cheerful glance makes.”</p><p>Lit., “makes the bones fat.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “heart.”</p><p>Lit., “The arrangings of the heart belong to a man.”</p><p>Or “the right answer.” Lit., “the answer of the tongue.”</p><p>Lit., “pure.”</p><p>Lit., “spirits.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll to Jehovah your works.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p><p>Or “Divine.”</p><p>Or “avoids.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “lowly of spirit.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p><p>Or “taste.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “A schemer.”</p><p>Or “glory.”</p><p>Lit., “ruling over his spirit.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016367.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Prov. 15:18-16:6)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>A hot-tempered man stirs up strife, But one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns, But the path of the upright is like a level highway. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a stupid man despises his mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense,* But the man of discernment walks straight ahead. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Plans fail when there is no consultation,* But there is accomplishment through many advisers.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A man rejoices in giving the right answer,* And a word spoken at the right time—how good it is! <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The path of life leads upward to one with insight, To turn him away from the Grave* below. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty, But he will preserve the boundary of the widow. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one, But pleasant sayings are pure to Him. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one making dishonest profit brings trouble* on his own household, But the one hating bribes will keep living. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering,* But the mouth of the wicked blurts out bad things. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Jehovah is far away from the wicked, But he hears the prayer of the righteous. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Bright eyes make* the heart rejoice; A good report invigorates the bones.* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The one who listens to life-giving reproof Is at home among the wise. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone refusing discipline despises his life,* But whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom, And before glory there is humility. </p><p><strong>16 </strong>A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,* But the answer he gives* is from Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right* to him, But Jehovah examines the motives.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,* And your plans will succeed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured* that he will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “confidential talk.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Lit., “in the answer of his mouth.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>Or “carefully considers how to answer; thinks before speaking.”</p><p>Or “A cheerful glance makes.”</p><p>Lit., “makes the bones fat.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “heart.”</p><p>Lit., “The arrangings of the heart belong to a man.”</p><p>Or “the right answer.” Lit., “the answer of the tongue.”</p><p>Lit., “pure.”</p><p>Lit., “spirits.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll to Jehovah your works.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 69 Make Me Know Your Ways***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 69</p>
<h1><strong>Make Me Know Your Ways</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Psalm 25:4</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. We’re gathered together Jehovah, our God,</p>
<p class="p5">Accepting your warm invitation.</p>
<p class="p6">Your Word is a lamp that lights up our roadway,</p>
<p class="p7">The source of divine education.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">Teach me your ways, and make me understand;</p>
<p class="p10">Incline my ear to hear your wise command.</p>
<p class="p11">Cause me to walk in ways of truth and right,</p>
<p class="p12">And make your law my principal delight.</p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. Unreachably high is your wisdom, O God;</p>
<p class="p14">Your judgments we find reassuring.</p>
<p class="p15">Your Word is a source of unending wonder;</p>
<p class="p16">Your sayings of truth are enduring.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">Teach me your ways, and make me understand;</p>
<p class="p19">Incline my ear to hear your wise command.</p>
<p class="p20">Cause me to walk in ways of truth and right,</p>
<p class="p21">And make your law my principal delight.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p22">(See also <span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Ex. 33:13;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> Ps. 1:2;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> 119:27,</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> 35,</a><span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16"> 73,</a><span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17"> 105</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 25:4)</strong></a> Make me know your ways, O Jehovah; Teach me your paths.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ex. 33:13)</strong></a> Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, make me know your ways, so that I may know you and continue to find favor in your eyes. Consider, too, that this nation is your people.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Ps. 1:2)</strong></a> But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone* day and night.</p><p></p><p>Or “he meditates on His law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:27)</strong></a> Make me understand the meaning* of your orders, So that I may ponder over* your wonderful works.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “way.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:35)</strong></a> Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight.</p><p></p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:73)</strong></a> Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:105)</strong></a> Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w07 7/15 p. 8 “Wisdom Is for a Protection”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>“Wisdom Is for a Protection”</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><em>“THE getting of wisdom is O how much better than gold! And the getting of understanding is to be chosen more than silver,” </em>states <span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Proverbs 16:16</a>. Why is wisdom so valuable? Because “wisdom is for a protection the same as money is for a protection; but the advantage of knowledge is that wisdom itself preserves alive its owners.” (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Ecclesiastes 7:12</a>) How, though, does wisdom preserve alive its owners?</p>
<p class="p3">Acquiring godly wisdom, that is, gaining accurate knowledge of God’s Word, the Bible, and acting in harmony with it, helps us to walk in the way Jehovah approves. (<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Proverbs 2:10-12</a>) King Solomon of ancient Israel says: <em>“The highway of the upright ones is to turn away from bad. One who is safeguarding his way is keeping his soul.” </em>(<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Proverbs 16:17</a>) Yes, wisdom delivers its owners from bad ways and preserves them alive! The concise, wise sayings at <span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Proverbs 16:16-33</a> show the positive effect that godly wisdom can have on our disposition, speech, and actions.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a></p>
<p class="p4"><strong>“Be Lowly in Spirit”</strong></p>
<p class="p5">Wisdom personified is portrayed as saying: “Self-exaltation and pride . . . I have hated.” (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Proverbs 8:13</a>) Pride and wisdom are poles apart. We need to act with wisdom and be careful not to develop a haughty, or arrogant, disposition. Especially should we be on guard if we have enjoyed success in some areas of life or are entrusted with a position of responsibility in the Christian congregation.</p>
<p class="p6"><em>“Pride is before a crash,” </em>warns <span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Proverbs 16:18</a>, <em>“and a haughty spirit before stumbling.” </em>Consider the greatest crash in the universe<wbr />—the fall of a perfect spirit son of God who made himself Satan the Devil. (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Genesis 3:1-5;</a><span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26"> Revelation 12:9</a>) Did he not manifest a haughty spirit prior to his crash? The Bible points to this when it says that a newly converted man should not be appointed to an office of oversight in the Christian congregation </p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:16)</strong></a> How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:12)</strong></a> For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Prov. 2:10-12)</strong></a> When wisdom enters your heart And knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Thinking ability will keep watch over you, And discernment will safeguard you, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To save you from the bad course, From the man speaking perverse things,</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:17)</strong></a> The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:16-33)</strong></a> How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Better to be humble* among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,* And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul* and a healing to the bones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The appetite* of a laborer makes him work hard For his hunger* urges him on. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A worthless man digs up what is bad; His speech is like a scorching fire. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A troublemaker* causes dissension, And a slanderer separates close friends. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>A violent man entices his neighbor And leads him in the wrong way. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>He winks his eye as he schemes harm. He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Gray hair is a crown of beauty* When it is found in the way of righteousness. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, And the one controlling his temper* than one conquering a city. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The lot is cast into the lap, But every decision by it is from Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “lowly of spirit.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p><p>Or “taste.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “A schemer.”</p><p>Or “glory.”</p><p>Lit., “ruling over his spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(Prov. 8:13)</strong></a> The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:18)</strong></a> Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Gen. 3:1-5)</strong></a> Now the serpent was the most cautious* of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?” <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”</p><p></p><p>Or “shrewdest; craftiest.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Rev. 12:9)</strong></a> So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> For a discussion of <span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Proverbs 16:1-15</a>, see pages 17-20 of the May 15, 2007, issue of <em>The Watchtower</em><em>.</em></p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:1-15)</strong></a> A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,* But the answer he gives* is from Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right* to him, But Jehovah examines the motives.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,* And your plans will succeed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured* that he will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways, He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Better is a little with righteousness Than a large income without justice.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A man may plot out his course in his heart, But it is Jehovah who directs his steps. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Inspired* decision should be on the lips of a king; He must never betray justice. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah; All the weights in the bag are his doing. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Wicked practices are detestable to kings, For the throne is firmly established by righteousness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings. They love someone who speaks honestly. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The king’s rage is like a messenger of death, But the wise man appeases* it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>In the light of the king’s face there is life; His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “The arrangings of the heart belong to a man.”</p><p>Or “the right answer.” Lit., “the answer of the tongue.”</p><p>Lit., “pure.”</p><p>Lit., “spirits.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll to Jehovah your works.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p><p>Or “Divine.”</p><p>Or “avoids.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w07 7/15 pp. 8-9 “Wisdom Is for a Protection”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>“Wisdom Is for a Protection”</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><em>“THE getting of wisdom is O how much better than gold! And the getting of understanding is to be chosen more than silver,” </em>states <span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Proverbs 16:16</a>. Why is wisdom so valuable? Because “wisdom is for a protection the same as money is for a protection; but the advantage of knowledge is that wisdom itself preserves alive its owners.” (<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Ecclesiastes 7:12</a>) How, though, does wisdom preserve alive its owners?</p>
<p class="p3">Acquiring godly wisdom, that is, gaining accurate knowledge of God’s Word, the Bible, and acting in harmony with it, helps us to walk in the way Jehovah approves. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Proverbs 2:10-12</a>) King Solomon of ancient Israel says: <em>“The highway of the upright ones is to turn away from bad. One who is safeguarding his way is keeping his soul.” </em>(<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Proverbs 16:17</a>) Yes, wisdom delivers its owners from bad ways and preserves them alive! The concise, wise sayings at <span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Proverbs 16:16-33</a> show the positive effect that godly wisdom can have on our disposition, speech, and actions.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a></p>
<p class="p4"><strong>“Be Lowly in Spirit”</strong></p>
<p class="p5">Wisdom personified is portrayed as saying: “Self-exaltation and pride . . . I have hated.” (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Proverbs 8:13</a>) Pride and wisdom are poles apart. We need to act with wisdom and be careful not to develop a haughty, or arrogant, disposition. Especially should we be on guard if we have enjoyed success in some areas of life or are entrusted with a position of responsibility in the Christian congregation.</p>
<p class="p6"><em>“Pride is before a crash,” </em>warns <span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Proverbs 16:18</a>, <em>“and a haughty spirit before stumbling.” </em>Consider the greatest crash in the universe<wbr />—the fall of a perfect spirit son of God who made himself Satan the Devil. (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Genesis 3:1-5;</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> Revelation 12:9</a>) Did he not manifest a haughty spirit prior to his crash? The Bible points to this when it says that a newly converted man should not be appointed to an office of oversight in the Christian congregation “for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed upon the Devil.” (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">1 Timothy 3:1, 2,</a><span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38"> 6</a>) How important it is to guard against feeding the pride of others as well as allowing it to develop in us!</p>
<p class="p7"><em>“Better is it to be lowly in spirit with the meek ones than to divide spoil with the self-exalted ones,” </em>states <span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Proverbs 16:19</a>. That this is good admonition is shown in the case of King Nebuchadnezzar of ancient Babylon. He proudly set up an immense image<wbr />—perhaps representing himself—<wbr />on the plain of Dura. The statue may have been mounted on a very high pedestal so that it reached a height of 90 feet <strong>[27 m]</strong>. (<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Daniel 3:1</a>) This towering monument was meant to be an impressive symbol of Nebuchadnezzar’s empire. While high and lofty things<wbr />—such as that statue as well as obelisks, steeples, and skyscrapers—<wbr />may impress humans, this is not the case with God. The psalmist sang: “Jehovah is high, and yet the humble one he sees; but the lofty one he knows only from a distance.” (<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Psalm 138:6</a>) In fact, “what is lofty among men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.” (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Luke 16:15</a>) Better it is for us to “be led along with the lowly things” than for us to “be minding lofty things.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Romans 12:16</a>.</p>
<p class="p8"><strong>Speak With “Insight” and “Persuasiveness”</strong></p>
<p class="p9">How does acquiring wisdom affect our speech? The wise king tells us: <em>“He that is showing insight in a matter will find good, and happy is he that is trusting in Jehovah. The one that is wise in heart will be called understanding, and he that is sweet in his lips adds persuasiveness. </em><em>To its owners insight is a well of life; and the discipline of the foolish ones is foolishness.</em> <em>The heart of the wise one causes his mouth to show insight, and to his lips it adds persuasiveness.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Proverbs 16:20-23</a>.</p>
<p class="p10">Wisdom helps us speak with insight and persuasiveness. Why? Because a person who is wise at heart tries to “find good” in a matter and ‘trusts in Jehovah.’ When we endeavor to find good in others, we are more likely to speak well of them. Rather than being harsh or confrontational, our words are sweet and persuasive. Insight into the circumstances of others helps us to understand the extent of hardship they may be experiencing and how they are coping with it.</p>
<p class="p11">Speech influenced by wisdom is also vital when it comes to our Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. When we teach God’s Word to others, our objective is not merely to convey Scriptural information. Our goal is to reach the heart of individuals. This calls for adding persuasiveness to our lips. The apostle Paul urged his associate Timothy to continue in the things he had been “persuaded to believe.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">2 Timothy 3:14, 15</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:16)</strong></a> How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:12)</strong></a> For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(Prov. 2:10-12)</strong></a> When wisdom enters your heart And knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Thinking ability will keep watch over you, And discernment will safeguard you, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To save you from the bad course, From the man speaking perverse things,</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:17)</strong></a> The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:16-33)</strong></a> How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Better to be humble* among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,* And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul* and a healing to the bones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The appetite* of a laborer makes him work hard For his hunger* urges him on. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A worthless man digs up what is bad; His speech is like a scorching fire. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A troublemaker* causes dissension, And a slanderer separates close friends. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>A violent man entices his neighbor And leads him in the wrong way. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>He winks his eye as he schemes harm. He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Gray hair is a crown of beauty* When it is found in the way of righteousness. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, And the one controlling his temper* than one conquering a city. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The lot is cast into the lap, But every decision by it is from Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “lowly of spirit.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p><p>Or “taste.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “A schemer.”</p><p>Or “glory.”</p><p>Lit., “ruling over his spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <strong>(Prov. 8:13)</strong></a> The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:18)</strong></a> Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Gen. 3:1-5)</strong></a> Now the serpent was the most cautious* of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?” <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”</p><p></p><p>Or “shrewdest; craftiest.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Rev. 12:9)</strong></a> So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 3:1, 2)</strong></a> This statement is trustworthy: If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind,* orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,</p><p></p><p>Or “have good judgment; be sensible.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 3:6)</strong></a> not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:19)</strong></a> Better to be humble* among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lowly of spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Dan. 3:1)</strong></a> Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king made an image* of gold that was 60 cubits* high and 6 cubits* wide. He set it up on the plain of Duʹra in the province* of Babylon.</p><p></p><p>Or “statue.”</p><p>About 27 m (88 ft). See App. B14.</p><p>About 2.7 m (8.8 ft). See App. B14.</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Ps. 138:6)</strong></a> Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble, But the haughty he knows only from a distance.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Luke 16:15)</strong></a> So he said to them: “You are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is considered exalted by men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Rom. 12:16)</strong></a> Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves; do not set your mind on lofty things,* but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “cultivate lofty ideas.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:20-23)</strong></a> The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,* And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:14, 15)</strong></a> You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from whom you learned them <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> For a discussion of <span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Proverbs 16:1-15</a>, see pages 17-20 of the May 15, 2007, issue of <em>The Watchtower</em><em>.</em></p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:1-15)</strong></a> A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,* But the answer he gives* is from Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right* to him, But Jehovah examines the motives.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,* And your plans will succeed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured* that he will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways, He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Better is a little with righteousness Than a large income without justice.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A man may plot out his course in his heart, But it is Jehovah who directs his steps. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Inspired* decision should be on the lips of a king; He must never betray justice. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah; All the weights in the bag are his doing. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Wicked practices are detestable to kings, For the throne is firmly established by righteousness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings. They love someone who speaks honestly. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The king’s rage is like a messenger of death, But the wise man appeases* it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>In the light of the king’s face there is life; His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “The arrangings of the heart belong to a man.”</p><p>Or “the right answer.” Lit., “the answer of the tongue.”</p><p>Lit., “pure.”</p><p>Lit., “spirits.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll to Jehovah your works.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p><p>Or “Divine.”</p><p>Or “avoids.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w07 7/15 pp. 9-10 “Wisdom Is for a Protection”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p6">“for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed upon the Devil.” (<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">1 Timothy 3:1, 2,</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> 6</a>) How important it is to guard against feeding the pride of others as well as allowing it to develop in us!</p>
<p class="p7"><em>“Better is it to be lowly in spirit with the meek ones than to divide spoil with the self-exalted ones,” </em>states <span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Proverbs 16:19</a>. That this is good admonition is shown in the case of King Nebuchadnezzar of ancient Babylon. He proudly set up an immense image<wbr />—perhaps representing himself—<wbr />on the plain of Dura. The statue may have been mounted on a very high pedestal so that it reached a height of 90 feet <strong>[27 m]</strong>. (<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">Daniel 3:1</a>) This towering monument was meant to be an impressive symbol of Nebuchadnezzar’s empire. While high and lofty things<wbr />—such as that statue as well as obelisks, steeples, and skyscrapers—<wbr />may impress humans, this is not the case with God. The psalmist sang: “Jehovah is high, and yet the humble one he sees; but the lofty one he knows only from a distance.” (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Psalm 138:6</a>) In fact, “what is lofty among men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.” (<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Luke 16:15</a>) Better it is for us to “be led along with the lowly things” than for us to “be minding lofty things.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Romans 12:16</a>.</p>
<p class="p8"><strong>Speak With “Insight” and “Persuasiveness”</strong></p>
<p class="p9">How does acquiring wisdom affect our speech? The wise king tells us: <em>“He that is showing insight in a matter will find good, and happy is he that is trusting in Jehovah. The one that is wise in heart will be called understanding, and he that is sweet in his lips adds persuasiveness. </em><em>To its owners insight is a well of life; and the discipline of the foolish ones is foolishness.</em> <em>The heart of the wise one causes his mouth to show insight, and to his lips it adds persuasiveness.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Proverbs 16:20-23</a>.</p>
<p class="p10">Wisdom helps us speak with insight and persuasiveness. Why? Because a person who is wise at heart tries to “find good” in a matter and ‘trusts in Jehovah.’ When we endeavor to find good in others, we are more likely to speak well of them. Rather than being harsh or confrontational, our words are sweet and persuasive. Insight into the circumstances of others helps us to understand the extent of hardship they may be experiencing and how they are coping with it.</p>
<p class="p11">Speech influenced by wisdom is also vital when it comes to our Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. When we teach God’s Word to others, our objective is not merely to convey Scriptural information. Our goal is to reach the heart of individuals. This calls for adding persuasiveness to our lips. The apostle Paul urged his associate Timothy to continue in the things he had been “persuaded to believe.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">2 Timothy 3:14, 15</a>.</p>
<p class="p12">The Greek word for “persuade” has the meaning of “bringing about a change of mind by the influence of reason or moral considerations,” says <em>An Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words, </em>by W. E. Vine. Coming up with convincing arguments that lead to a change of mind in our listener calls for insight into his or her thinking, interests, circumstances, and background. How can we gain such insight? The disciple James answers: “Be swift about hearing, slow about speaking.” (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">James 1:19</a>) By drawing the listener out and carefully paying attention to what he says, we can get to know what he is at heart.</p>
<p class="p13">The apostle Paul was outstanding in his ability to persuade others. (<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Acts 18:4</a>) Even one of his opposers, Demetrius, a silversmith, acknowledged: “Not only in Ephesus but in nearly all the district of Asia this Paul has persuaded a considerable crowd and turned them to another opinion.” (<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Acts 19:26</a>) Did Paul take personal credit for his effectiveness in the preaching work? Not at all. He considered his preaching to be “a demonstration of [God’s] spirit and power.” (<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">1 Corinthians 2:4, 5</a>) We too have the help of Jehovah’s holy spirit. Because we trust in Jehovah, we are confident of his help as we endeavor to speak with insight and persuasiveness in our ministry.</p>
<p class="p14">No wonder that “the one that is wise in heart” is called “intelligent” or “discerning”! (<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Proverbs 16:21</a>, <em>An American Translation; New International Version</em>) Yes, insight is “a well of life” to those who have it. But what about the foolish? They ‘despise wisdom and discipline.’ (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Proverbs 1:7</a>) What results do they reap by rejecting discipline from Jehovah? As noted above, Solomon says: “The discipline of the foolish ones is foolishness.” (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Proverbs 16:22</a>) They receive further discipline, often in the form of severe chastisement. The foolish may also bring upon themselves hardship, shame, disease, and even untimely death.</p>
<p class="p15">Pointing further to the wholesome effect that wisdom has on our speech, the king of Israel says: <em>“Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, sweet to the soul and a healing to the bones.” </em>(<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Proverbs 16:24</a>) As honey is sweet and provides quick refreshment to a hungry person, pleasant sayings are encouraging and refreshing. Honey also has health-giving and curative properties and is good for a person. So are pleasant sayings; they are healthful spiritually.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Proverbs 24:13, 14</a>.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Beware of ‘a Way That Seems Upright’</strong></p>
<p class="p17"><em>“There exists a way that is upright before a man,” </em>says Solomon, <em>“but the ways of death are the end of it afterward.” </em>(<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Proverbs 16:25</a>) This is a warning against false reasoning and the pursuit of a course opposed to divine law. A certain path may seem right from a fleshly standpoint but may really be against the righteous principles of God’s Word. Moreover, Satan may promote such deception </p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 3:1, 2)</strong></a> This statement is trustworthy: If a man is reaching out to be an overseer, he is desirous of a fine work. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind,* orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,</p><p></p><p>Or “have good judgment; be sensible.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 3:6)</strong></a> not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:19)</strong></a> Better to be humble* among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lowly of spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(Dan. 3:1)</strong></a> Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king made an image* of gold that was 60 cubits* high and 6 cubits* wide. He set it up on the plain of Duʹra in the province* of Babylon.</p><p></p><p>Or “statue.”</p><p>About 27 m (88 ft). See App. B14.</p><p>About 2.7 m (8.8 ft). See App. B14.</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Ps. 138:6)</strong></a> Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble, But the haughty he knows only from a distance.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(Luke 16:15)</strong></a> So he said to them: “You are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is considered exalted by men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(Rom. 12:16)</strong></a> Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves; do not set your mind on lofty things,* but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “cultivate lofty ideas.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:20-23)</strong></a> The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,* And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:14, 15)</strong></a> You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from whom you learned them <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Jas. 1:19)</strong></a> Know this, my beloved brothers: Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak, slow to anger,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <strong>(Acts 18:4)</strong></a> He would give a talk* in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.</p><p></p><p>Or “He would reason with them.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Acts 19:26)</strong></a> Now you see and hear how, not only in Ephʹe·sus but in nearly all the province of Asia, this Paul has persuaded a considerable crowd and turned them to another opinion, saying that the gods made by hands are not really gods.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 2:4, 5)</strong></a> and my speech and what I preached were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with a demonstration of spirit and power, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>so that your faith might be, not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:21)</strong></a> The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness.</p><p></p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Prov. 1:7)</strong></a> The fear of* Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.</p><p></p><p>Or “reverence for.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:22)</strong></a> Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:24)</strong></a> Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul* and a healing to the bones.</p><p></p><p>Or “taste.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Prov. 24:13, 14)</strong></a> My son, eat honey, because it is good; Honey from the comb is sweet to the taste. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Likewise, know that wisdom is good for you.* If you find it, you will have a future And your hope will not be cut off.</p><p></p><p>Or “is sweet to your soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:25)</strong></a> There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***g 11/13 p. 16 Do You Have “a Feast Constantly”?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1><strong>Do You Have “a Feast Constantly”?</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">“All the days of the afflicted one are bad; but the one that is good at heart has a feast constantly.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Proverbs 15:15</a>.</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p3">WHAT do those words mean? They refer to one’s mental and emotional state. “The afflicted one” dwells on the negative<wbr />—an outlook that makes his days “bad,” or dismal. By contrast, the one who “is good at heart” tries to focus on the positive<wbr />—an attitude that fosters inner joy, giving him “a feast constantly.”</p>
<p class="p4">We all have problems that can rob us of a measure of happiness. Yet, we may be able to do certain things that help us to retain our joy through difficult times. Consider what the Bible says.</p>
<ul><li><p class="p5">  Do not let anxieties over tomorrow weigh you down today. Jesus Christ said: “Do not worry about tomorrow; it will have enough worries of its own. There is no need to add to the troubles each day brings.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Matthew 6:34</a>, <em>Good News Translation.</em></p>
</li>
<li><p class="p6">  Try to focus on the good things that have happened to you. In fact, when you feel down, why not make a list of those good things and reflect on them? Also, do not dwell on past mistakes or bad deeds. Learn from them, and move on. Be like a driver who <em>glances </em>into his rearview mirror but does not <em>focus </em>on it. Keep in mind, too, that “there is the true forgiveness with [God].”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Psalm 130:4</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p7">  When anxieties weigh you down, confide in someone who may be able to cheer you up. “Anxious care” causes our heart “to bow down, but <em>the good word </em>is what makes it rejoice,” says <span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Proverbs 12:25</a>. That “good word” may come from a family member or a trusted friend<wbr />—someone who is not cynical or pessimistic but “is loving all the time.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">Proverbs 17:17</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p8">The wise sayings found in the Bible have helped many to find more joy in life, even through trying times. May those precious sayings help you too.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(Prov. 15:15)</strong></a> All the days of the afflicted one are bad, But the one with a cheerful* heart has a continual feast.</p><p></p><p>Or “good.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:34)</strong></a> So never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Each day has enough of its own troubles.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Ps. 130:4)</strong></a> For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Prov. 12:25)</strong></a> Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,* But a good word cheers it up.</p><p></p><p>Or “depresses him.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(Prov. 17:17)</strong></a> A true friend shows love at all times, And is a brother who is born for times of distress.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w07 5/15 pp. 18-19 “Your Plans Will Be Firmly Established”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p10">Self-love may cause us to justify our errors, camouflage bad personality traits, and be blind to our own badness. Jehovah, though, cannot be deceived. He is making an estimate of spirits. A person’s spirit is his or her dominant mental inclination and is connected to the heart. To a large extent, its development depends on the activity of the figurative heart, which involves such things as our thoughts, emotions, and motives. The spirit is what “the examiner of hearts” estimates, and his judgments are free from favoritism or partiality. We are wise to guard our spirit.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>“Roll Your Works Upon Jehovah”</strong></p>
<p class="p12">Making plans involves the thought process<wbr />—an activity of our heart. Deeds usually follow plans. Will we succeed in our endeavors? Solomon says: <em>“Roll your works upon Jehovah himself and your plans will be firmly established.” </em>(<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Proverbs 16:3</a>) To roll our works on Jehovah means to place our trust in him, to rely on him, to be committed to him<wbr />—to roll the burden off our shoulders, as it were, onto his. The psalmist sang: “Roll upon Jehovah your way, and rely upon him, and he himself will act.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Psalm 37:5</a>.</p>
<p class="p13">For our plans to be firmly established, however, they must be in harmony with God’s Word, and they must stem from good motives. Moreover, we should pray to Jehovah for help and support and conscientiously do our best to follow the Bible’s advice. It is particularly important to ‘throw our burden upon Jehovah’ when we are faced with trials or difficulties, for ‘he will sustain us.’ Indeed, “never will he allow the righteous one to totter.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Psalm 55:22</a>.</p>
<p class="p14"><strong>“Everything Jehovah Has Made for His Purpose”</strong></p>
<p class="p15">What else will result from our rolling our works upon Jehovah? <em>“Everything Jehovah has made for his purpose,” </em>says the wise king. (<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Proverbs 16:4a</a>) The Creator of the universe is a God of purpose. When we roll our works upon him, our life becomes filled with purposeful and meaningful activity, void of futility or vanity. And Jehovah’s purpose for the earth and man upon it is eternal. (<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Ephesians 3:11</a>) He formed the earth and created it “to be inhabited.” (<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Isaiah 45:18</a>) Moreover, what he originally purposed for mankind on earth is bound to become a reality. (<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Genesis 1:28</a>) A life devoted to the true God will be unending and have meaning forever.</p>
<p class="p16">Jehovah has made <em>“even the wicked one for the evil day.” </em>(<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Proverbs 16:4b</a>) He did not create the wicked, for “perfect is his activity.” (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Deuteronomy 32:4</a>) However, he has allowed them to come into existence and continue living until he sees fit to execute his adverse judgment. For example, Jehovah said to Pharaoh of Egypt: “For this cause I have kept you in existence, for the sake of showing you my power and in order to have my name declared in all the earth.” (<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">Exodus 9:16</a>) The Ten Plagues and the destruction of Pharaoh and his forces in the Red Sea were indeed memorable demonstrations of God’s matchless power.</p>
<p class="p17">Jehovah can also make circumstances work out in such a way that the wicked unknowingly serve his purpose. The psalmist said: “The very rage of man will laud you; the remainder of raging you [Jehovah] will gird upon yourself.” (<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Psalm 76:10</a>) Jehovah may allow his enemies to express their rage toward his servants<wbr />—but only to the extent necessary to discipline his people and thus train them. What is in excess of this, God takes upon himself.</p>
<p class="p18">While Jehovah supports his humble servants, what about the proud and arrogant? <em>“Everyone that is proud in heart is something detestable to Jehovah,” </em>says the king of Israel. <em>“Hand may join to hand, yet one will not be free from punishment.” </em>(<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Proverbs 16:5</a>) Those “proud in heart” may band together in mutual support, but they will not escape punishment. We are wise, then, to cultivate the spirit of humility regardless of how knowledgeable we are or how capable we may be or whatever service privileges we may have.</p>
<p class="p19"><strong>“In the Fear of Jehovah”</strong></p>
<p class="p20">Born in sin, we are prone to err. (<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">Romans 3:23;</a><span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84"> 5:12</a>) What will help us to avoid making plans that will lead to a bad course? <span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Proverbs 16:6</a> states: <em>“By loving-kindness and trueness error is atoned for, and in the fear of Jehovah one turns away from bad.” </em>While by his loving-kindness and trueness Jehovah atones for our sins, it is the fear of Jehovah that serves as a deterrent to committing sins. How vital it is that along with love for God and appreciation for his loving-kindness, we cultivate fear of displeasing him!</p>
<p class="p21">The fear of God enters into our heart when we develop reverence and respect for God’s awesome power. Just think of his power reflected in the creation! Being reminded of the manifestation of power in God’s creative works helped the patriarch Job to readjust his thinking. (<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Job 42:1-6</a>) Are we not likewise affected when we read and reflect on the accounts of Jehovah’s dealings with his people as recorded in the Bible? The psalmist sang: “Come, you people, and see the activities of God. His dealing with the sons of men is fear-inspiring.” (<span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">Psalm 66:5</a>) Jehovah’s loving-kindness is not to be taken for granted. When the Israelites ‘rebelled and made God’s holy spirit feel hurt, Jehovah was changed into an enemy of theirs; he himself warred against them.’ (<span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88">Isaiah 63:10</a>) On the other hand, <em>“when Jehovah takes pleasure in the ways of a man he causes even his enemies themselves to be at peace with him.” </em>(<span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89">Proverbs 16:7</a>) What a protection the fear of Jehovah is!</p>
<p class="p22"><em>“Better is a little with righteousness than an abundance of products without justice,” </em>says the wise king. (<span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90">Proverbs 16:8</a>) <span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91">Proverbs 15:16</a> states: “Better is a little in the fear of Jehovah than an abundant supply and confusion along with it.” A reverential awe of God is certainly essential for staying on a righteous course.</p>
<p class="p23"><strong>“The Heart of Earthling Man May Think Out His Way”</strong></p>
<p class="p24">Man was created a free moral agent, able to choose between right and wrong. (<span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92">Deuteronomy 30:19, 20</a>) Our figurative heart has the ability to consider different options and fix its aim on one or more of them. Indicating that making choices is our responsibility, Solomon says: <em>“The heart of earthling man may think out his way.” </em>Once this is done, <em>“Jehovah himself does the directing of his steps.” </em>(<span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93">Proverbs 16:9</a>) Since Jehovah can </p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:3)</strong></a> Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,* And your plans will succeed.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Roll to Jehovah your works.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Ps. 37:5)</strong></a> Commit your way to* Jehovah; Rely on him, and he will act in your behalf.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Roll your way upon.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(Ps. 55:22)</strong></a> Throw your burden on Jehovah, And he will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to fall.*</p><p></p><p>Or “stagger; totter.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:4)</strong></a> Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(Eph. 3:11)</strong></a> This is according to the eternal purpose that he formed in connection with the Christ, Jesus our Lord,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <strong>(Isa. 45:18)</strong></a> For this is what Jehovah says, The Creator of the heavens, the true God, The One who formed the earth, its Maker who firmly established it, Who did not create it simply for nothing,* but formed it to be inhabited: “I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “to be empty.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(Gen. 1:28)</strong></a> Further, God blessed them, and God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many, fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving on the earth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:4)</strong></a> Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Deut. 32:4)</strong></a> The Rock, perfect is his activity, For all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness who is never unjust; Righteous and upright is he.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(Ex. 9:16)</strong></a> But for this very reason I have kept you in existence: to show you my power and to have my name declared in all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Ps. 76:10)</strong></a> For the rage of man will serve to your praise; With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:5)</strong></a> Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured* that he will not go unpunished.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <strong>(Rom. 3:23)</strong></a> For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <strong>(Rom. 5:12)</strong></a> That is why, just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned—.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:6)</strong></a> By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <strong>(Job 42:1-6)</strong></a> Then Job said in reply to Jehovah:  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Now I know that you are able to do all things And that nothing you have in mind to do is impossible for you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You said, ‘Who is this who is obscuring my counsel without knowledge?’ Therefore I spoke, but without understanding About things too wonderful for me, which I do not know.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You said, ‘Please listen, and I will speak. I will question you, and you inform me.’  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>My ears have heard about you, But now I do see you with my eyes.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>That is why I take back what I said,* And I repent in dust and ashes.”</p><p></p><p>Or “make a retraction.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <strong>(Ps. 66:5)</strong></a> Come and see the works of God. His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <strong>(Isa. 63:10)</strong></a> But they rebelled and grieved his holy spirit. He then turned into their enemy, And he fought against them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:7)</strong></a> When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways, He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:8)</strong></a> Better is a little with righteousness Than a large income without justice.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <strong>(Prov. 15:16)</strong></a> Better is a little in the fear of Jehovah Than great wealth along with anxiety.*</p><p></p><p>Or “confusion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <strong>(Deut. 30:19, 20)</strong></a> I take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today that I have put life and death before you, the blessing and the curse; and you must choose life so that you may live, you and your descendants, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>by loving Jehovah your God, by listening to his voice, and by sticking to him, for he is your life and by him you will endure a long time in the land that Jehovah swore to give to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:9)</strong></a> A man may plot out his course in his heart, But it is Jehovah who directs his steps.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***bh pp. 191-192 Remain in God’s Love***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu">18. Why should we worship Jehovah publicly in association with true Christians?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah wants us to worship him publicly in association with true Christians. That is why his Word says: “Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.” (<span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) When we gather with fellow believers at Christian meetings, we have a wonderful opportunity to praise and worship our beloved God. We also build one another up and encourage one another.</p>
<p class="qu">19. How can we work to strengthen the bonds of love in the Christian congregation?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>As we associate with other worshippers of Jehovah, we strengthen the bonds of love and friendship in the congregation. It is important that we look for the good in one another, as Jehovah looks for the good in us. Do not expect perfection from your fellow believers. Remember that all are at different stages of spiritual growth and that every one of us makes mistakes. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95"><strong>Colossians 3:13</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Seek to build close friendships with those who love Jehovah intensely, and you will find yourself growing spiritually. Yes, worshipping Jehovah with your spiritual brothers and sisters will help you to remain in God’s love. How does Jehovah reward those who worship him faithfully and thus remain in his love?</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Col. 3:13)</strong> Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely even if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Just as Jehovah* freely forgave you, you must also do the same.</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***sn song 117 We Must Be Taught***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 117</p>
<h1><strong>We Must Be Taught</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96">Isaiah 50:4;</a><span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97"> 54:13</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Come with rejoicing, and learn about Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p5">“Come drink life’s water,” the spirit has said.</p>
<p class="p6">Healthful instruction, God has provided.</p>
<p class="p7">All those who hunger for truth will be fed.</p>
<p class="p8">2. Never forsaking our gathering together,</p>
<p class="p9">We must be taught; we must learn what is right.</p>
<p class="p10">Here with God’s spirit, here with our brothers,</p>
<p class="p11">Here we are strengthened to walk in the light.</p>
<p class="p12">3. Lips that sing praise, how encouraging to hear them!</p>
<p class="p13">Tongues of the taught ones, how sweet is their sound!</p>
<p class="p14">Oh, may we always meet with God’s people!</p>
<p class="p15">Oh, may we always among them be found!</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p16">(See also <span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">Heb. 10:24, 25;</a><span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99"> Rev. 22:17</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <strong>(Isa. 50:4)</strong></a> The Sovereign Lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those taught,* So that I may know how to answer* the tired one with the right word.* He awakens me morning by morning; He awakens my ear to listen like the taught ones.</p><p></p><p>Or “a well-trained tongue.”</p><p>Or possibly, “strengthen.”</p><p>Lit., “with a word.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <strong>(Isa. 54:13)</strong></a> And all your sons* will be taught by Jehovah, And the peace of your sons* will be abundant.</p><p></p><p>Or “children.”</p><p>Or “children.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <strong>(Rev. 22:17)</strong></a> And the spirit and the bride keep on saying, “Come!” and let anyone hearing say, “Come!” and let anyone thirsting come; let anyone who wishes take life’s water free.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***kr pp. 19-23 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>Zealous Preaching</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>23. </strong>How did the <em>Watch Tower </em>make it plain that all anointed ones must be preachers of the truth?</p>
<p class="p32"><strong><sup>23 </sup>The Bible Students taught that all the anointed must be preachers of the truth. </strong>In 1885, the <em>Watch Tower </em>commented: “We should not forget that every member of the anointed body is anointed to preach (<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Isa. 61:1</a>), called to the ministry.” An 1888 issue contained this exhortation: “Our commission is plain . . . If we ignore it and excuse ourselves, we are certainly slothful servants, proving our unworthiness of the high position to which we are called.”</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>24, 25. </strong>(a) How did Russell and his close associates do more than encourage people to preach? (b) How did one colporteur describe his work in the “preautomobile days”?</p>
<p class="p33"><strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Brother Russell and his close associates did more than encourage people to preach. They also began to produce tracts called <em>Bible Students’ Tracts, </em>which were later also called <em>Old Theology Quarterly. </em>Readers of the <em>Watch Tower </em>received these to distribute to the public without charge.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p94">We do well to ask ourselves, ‘Is the preaching work central to my life?’</p>
</div>
<p class="p34"><strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Those who devoted themselves to the ministry full-time were called colporteurs. Charles Capen, mentioned earlier, was among them. He later recalled: “I used maps made by the United States Government Geological Survey to guide my covering the territory in Pennsylvania. These maps showed all the roads, making it possible to reach all sections of each county on foot. Sometimes after a three-day trip through the country taking orders for the books in the <em>Studies in the Scriptures </em>series, I would hire a horse and buggy so that I could make the deliveries. I often stopped and stayed overnight with farmers. Those were the preautomobile days.”</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>26. </strong>(a) Why did God’s people need to engage in the preaching work in order to be prepared for Christ’s reign? (b) What questions do we do well to ask ourselves?</p>
<p class="p35"><strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Such early efforts at preaching certainly required courage and zeal. Would true Christians have been prepared for Christ’s reign if they had not been taught the importance of the preaching work? Assuredly not! After all, that work was to become an outstanding feature of Christ’s presence. (<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Matt. 24:14</a>) God’s people had to be prepared to make that lifesaving work the central feature of their lives. We today do well to ask ourselves: ‘Is the preaching work central to my life? Do I make sacrifices in order to have a full share in that activity?’</p>
<h2><strong>God’s Kingdom Is Born!</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>27, 28. </strong>What did the apostle John witness in vision, and how did Satan and his demons react to the birth of the Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p37"><strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Finally, the momentous year 1914 arrived. As we discussed at the outset of this chapter, there were no human eyewitnesses to the glorious events in heaven. However, the apostle John was given a vision that described matters in symbolic terms. Imagine this: John witnesses “a great sign” in heaven. God’s “woman”<wbr />—his organization of spirit creatures in heaven—<wbr />is pregnant and gives birth to a male child. This symbolic child, we are told, is soon to “shepherd all the nations with an iron rod.” Upon its birth, though, the child is “snatched away to God and to his throne.” A loud voice in heaven says: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102">Rev. 12:1,</a><span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103"> 5,</a><span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104"> 10</a>.</p>
<p class="p38"><strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Without doubt, John saw in vision the birth of the Messianic Kingdom. That event was surely a glorious one, but it did not please everyone. Satan and his demons warred against the faithful angels, who were under the leadership of Michael, or Christ. The outcome? We read: “Down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105">Rev. 12:7,</a><span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106"> 9</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>29, 30. </strong>Following the birth of the Messianic Kingdom, how did conditions change (a) on earth? (b) in heaven?</p>
<p class="p39"><strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Long before 1914, the Bible Students said that a time of trouble would begin in that marked year. But even they could not have imagined how accurate that prediction would turn out to be. As John’s vision revealed, Satan would then begin to have an even greater impact on human society: “Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.” (<span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107">Rev. 12:12</a>) In 1914, the first world war broke out and the sign of Christ’s presence in kingly power began to see global fulfillment. The “last days” of this system of things had begun.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108">2 Tim. 3:1</a>.</p>
<p class="p40"><strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>However, there was joy in heaven. Satan and his demons were banished forever. John’s account reads: “On this account be glad, you heavens and you who reside in them!” (<span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109">Rev. 12:12</a>) With the heavens cleansed and Jesus enthroned as King, the Messianic Kingdom was now poised to act in behalf of God’s people on earth. What action would it take? As we saw at the outset of this chapter, Christ as “the messenger of the covenant” would first act as a refiner of God’s servants here on earth. What would that mean?</p>
<h2><strong>A Time of Testing</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>31. </strong>What did Malachi foretell about the period of refining, and how did that prophecy begin to see fulfillment? (See also the footnote.)</p>
<p class="p42"><strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Malachi foretold that the refining process would not be easy. He wrote: “Who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye of laundrymen.” (<span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110">Mal. 3:2</a>) How true those words proved to be! Beginning in 1914, God’s people on earth faced a succession of major tests and hardships. As World War I raged, many Bible Students experienced vicious persecution and imprisonment.<span id="footnotesource3"></span><a href="#footnote3">*</a></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>32. </strong>What internal turmoil afflicted God’s people following 1916?</p>
<p class="p43"><strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>From within, the organization suffered turmoil as well. In 1916, Brother Russell died at only 64 years of age, leaving many of God’s people in shock. His death revealed that some had been placing too much emphasis on one exemplary man. Though Brother Russell wanted no such reverence, a measure of creature worship had grown up around him. Many thought that the progressive revelation of truth had ended with his death, and some bitterly resisted efforts to move forward. That attitude contributed to an outbreak of apostasy that divided the organization.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>33. </strong>How did unfulfilled expectations test God’s people?</p>
<p class="p44"><strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Unfulfilled expectations were another test. Though the <em>Watch Tower </em>had rightly pointed to 1914 as the year when the Gentile Times would end, the brothers did not yet understand what would take place in that year. (<span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111">Luke 21:24</a>) They thought that in 1914, Christ would take his anointed bride class to heaven to rule with him there. Those hopes were not realized. Late in 1917, <em>The Watch Tower </em>announced that a 40-year harvest period would end in the spring of 1918. But the preaching work did not end. It continued to prosper after that date passed. The magazine suggested that the harvest had indeed ended but that a period of gleaning remained. Still, many stopped serving Jehovah because of disappointment.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>34. </strong>What daunting test arose in 1918, and why did Christendom think that God’s people were “dead”?</p>
<p class="p45"><strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>A daunting test arose in 1918. J. F. Rutherford, who succeeded C. T. Russell in taking the lead among God’s people, was arrested along with seven other responsible brothers. They were unjustly sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in the federal penitentiary in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.A. For a time, the work of God’s people may have seemed paralyzed. Many among the clergy of Christendom rejoiced. They assumed that with the “leaders” imprisoned, the headquarters in Brooklyn closed up, and the preaching work under attack in America and Europe, those pestilent Bible Students were “dead”<wbr />—no longer a threat. (<span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112">Rev. 11:3,</a><span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113"> 7-10</a>) How wrong they were!</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 23</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 61:1)</strong> The spirit of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah is upon me, Because Jehovah anointed me to declare good news to the meek. He sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, To proclaim liberty to the captives And the wide opening of the eyes to the prisoners,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 26</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 27</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:1)</strong> Then a great sign was seen in heaven: A woman was arrayed* with the sun, and the moon was beneath her feet, and on her head was a crown of 12 stars,</p><p></p><p>Or “clothed.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 27</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:5)</strong> And she gave birth to a son, a male, who is to shepherd all the nations with an iron rod. And her child was snatched* away to God and to his throne.</p><p></p><p>Or “caught.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 27</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:10)</strong> I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 28</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:7)</strong> And war broke out in heaven: Miʹcha·el* and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled</p><p></p><p>Meaning “Who Is Like God?”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 28</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:9)</strong> So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 29</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:12)</strong> On this account be glad, you heavens and you who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 29</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:1)</strong> But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 30</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:12)</strong> On this account be glad, you heavens and you who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 31</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:2)</strong> “But who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye* of laundrymen.</p><p></p><p>Or “soap.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 33</span></a> <strong>(Luke 21:24)</strong> And they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations* until the appointed times of the nations* are fulfilled.</p><p></p><p>Or “Gentiles.”</p><p>Or “Gentiles.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 34</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 11:3)</strong> I will cause my two witnesses to prophesy for 1,260 days dressed in sackcloth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 34</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 11:7-10)</strong> When they have finished their witnessing, the wild beast that ascends out of the abyss will wage war with them and conquer them and kill them. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>And their corpses will be on the main street of the great city that is in a spiritual sense called Sodʹom and Egypt, where their Lord was also executed on the stake. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>And those of the peoples and tribes and tongues* and nations will look at their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not allow their corpses to be laid in a tomb. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>And those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them and celebrate, and they will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those dwelling on the earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “languages.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote3"><p><a href="#footnotesource3">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 31</span></a> In September 1920, <em>The Golden Age </em>(now <em>Awake!</em>) published a special issue detailing numerous instances of wartime persecution<wbr />—some of it shockingly brutal—<wbr />in Canada, England, Germany, and the United States. In contrast, the decades prior to the first world war saw very little persecution of that kind.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016367.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***sn song 102 Join in the Kingdom Song!***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 102</p>
<h1><strong>Join in the Kingdom Song!</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource114"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation114">Psalm 98:1</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. This is a song, a happy song of vict’ry;</p>
<p class="p5">It magnifies the One who is supreme.</p>
<p class="p6">The words give hope and prompt all to be loyal.</p>
<p class="p7">Come sing with us; enjoy its Kingdom theme:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">‘Come worship God Before His throne.</p>
<p class="p10">His Son is King; Let’s make it known!</p>
<p class="p11">Come learn this song, this song about the Kingdom;</p>
<p class="p12">Bow down to God, and praise His holy name.’</p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. With this new song, we advertise the Kingdom.</p>
<p class="p14">Christ Jesus rules; the earth is his domain.</p>
<p class="p15">And as foretold, there is a newborn nation:</p>
<p class="p16">The Kingdom heirs, who welcome Jesus’ reign:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">‘Come worship God Before His throne.</p>
<p class="p19">His Son is King; Let’s make it known!</p>
<p class="p20">Come learn this song, this song about the Kingdom;</p>
<p class="p21">Bow down to God, and praise His holy name.’</p>
</div>
<p class="p22">3. This Kingdom song, all humble ones can master.</p>
<p class="p23">The words are clear, their message warm and bright.</p>
<p class="p24">In all the earth, vast multitudes have learned it,</p>
<p class="p25">And they in turn still others now invite:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p26">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p27">‘Come worship God Before His throne.</p>
<p class="p28">His Son is King; Let’s make it known!</p>
<p class="p29">Come learn this song, this song about the Kingdom;</p>
<p class="p30">Bow down to God, and praise His holy name.’</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p31">(See also <span id="citationsource115"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation115">Ps. 95:6;</a><span id="citationsource116"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation116"> 1 Pet. 2:9, 10;</a><span id="citationsource117"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation117"> Rev. 12:10</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation114"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource114">^ <strong>(Ps. 98:1)</strong></a> Sing to Jehovah a new song, For he has done wonderful things. His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation.*</p><p></p><p>Or “has won him victory.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation115"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource115">^ <strong>(Ps. 95:6)</strong></a> Come, let us worship and bow down; Let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation116"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource116">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:9, 10)</strong></a> But you are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies”* of the One who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you were once not a people, but now you are God’s people; once you had not been shown mercy, but now you have received mercy.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the virtues,” that is, his praiseworthy qualities and deeds.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation117"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource117">^ <strong>(Rev. 12:10)</strong></a> I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God!</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
