<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 Pursue Peace With Others</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016371.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 17:1-21:31)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Better is a piece of dry bread where there is peace* Than a house full of feasting* along with quarreling.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A servant with insight will rule over a son who acts shamefully; He will share in the inheritance as one of the brothers.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The refining pot is for silver and the furnace for gold, But Jehovah is the examiner of hearts.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A wicked man pays attention to hurtful speech, And a deceptive man listens to a malicious tongue.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Whoever mocks the poor insults his Maker, And whoever rejoices over another’s disaster will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Grandsons* are a crown to the aged, And fathers* are the glory of their sons.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Upright* speech does not befit a fool. How much less does false speech befit a ruler!*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>A gift is like a precious stone* to its owner; Everywhere he turns, it brings him success.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Whoever forgives* a transgression seeks love, But the one who keeps harping on a matter separates close friends. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A rebuke makes a deeper impression on one having understanding Than striking a stupid person a hundred times. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>A bad man seeks only rebellion, But a cruel messenger will be sent to punish him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Better to meet a bear bereaved of her cubs Than to encounter someone stupid in his foolishness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>If anyone repays bad for good, Bad will not depart from his house. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate;* Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Anyone who acquits the wicked one and anyone who condemns the righteous one —Both of them are detestable to Jehovah. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>What good is it that the stupid one has the means to acquire wisdom When he has no heart for acquiring it?* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>A true friend shows love at all times, And is a brother who is born for times of distress. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A man lacking good sense* shakes hands and agrees To put up security* in the presence of his neighbor. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The one who loves conflict loves transgression. Anyone who makes his entryway high invites a crash. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one who is crooked at heart will not find success,* And the one who speaks deceitfully will fall into ruin. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The one who fathers a stupid child will experience grief; And the father of a senseless child has no joy. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>A joyful heart is good medicine,* But a crushed spirit saps one’s strength.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A wicked man will take a bribe in secret* To pervert the course of justice. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Wisdom is directly in front of the discerning person, But the eyes of the stupid wander to the ends of the earth. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>A stupid son brings grief to his father And heartache* to the one who gave birth to him. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>To punish* the righteous one is not good, And to flog honorable people goes against what is right. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A man of knowledge restrains his words, And a discerning man will remain calm.* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Even a fool who keeps silent will be considered wise, And the one who seals his lips, discerning. </p><p><strong>18 </strong>Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires; He rejects* all practical wisdom.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A stupid person takes no pleasure in understanding; He would rather disclose what is in his heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When a wicked person comes, contempt also comes, And along with dishonor there is disgrace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters. The fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>It is not good to show partiality to the wicked one Or to deprive the righteous one of justice.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The speech of the stupid one leads to quarrels, And his mouth invites a beating.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The mouth of the stupid is his ruin, And his lips are a snare for his life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The words of a slanderer are like tasty morsels;* They are gulped right down into the stomach.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Whoever is lazy in his work Is a brother to the one who causes ruin. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. Into it the righteous one runs and receives protection.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The wealth of the rich is his fortified city; It is like a protective wall in his imagination. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Before a crash a man’s heart is lofty, And before glory there is humility. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>When anyone replies to a matter before he hears the facts, It is foolish and humiliating. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A person’s spirit can sustain him through illness, But who can bear a crushed spirit?* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The heart of the understanding one acquires knowledge, And the ear of the wise seeks to find knowledge. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A man’s gift opens the way for him; It gives him access to great people. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The first to state his case seems right, Until the other party comes and cross-examines him.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Casting lots puts an end to disputes And decides between* strong opponents. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A brother offended is more unyielding than a fortified city, And there are disputes like the bars of a fortress. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of a man’s speech* his stomach will be filled; He will be satisfied with what his lips produce. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Death and life are in the power of the tongue; Those who love to use it will eat its fruitage. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The one who finds a good wife has found something good, And he receives Jehovah’s favor.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The poor man implores when speaking, But the rich man answers harshly. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>There are companions ready to crush one another, But there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother. </p><p><strong>19 </strong>It is better to be poor and walk in integrity Than to be stupid and speak lies.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>A person* without knowledge is not good, And the one who acts rashly* is sinning.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is a man’s own foolishness that distorts his way, And his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Wealth attracts many friends, But the poor man will be deserted even by his friend.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will not escape.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Many seek the favor of a noble,* And everyone is a friend to the man who gives gifts.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>All the brothers of a poor man hate him; How much more he is shunned by his friends! He pursues them with requests, but no one responds.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whoever acquires good sense* loves himself.* Whoever treasures discernment will find success.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A false witness will not go unpunished, And the one who lies with every breath will perish. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>It is not fitting for a fool to live in luxury; How much less for a servant to rule over princes! <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger, And it is beauty on his part to overlook* an offense.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The king’s rage is like the growling of a lion,* But his favor is like dew on the vegetation. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A stupid son brings adversity on his father, And a quarrelsome* wife is like a roof that never stops leaking. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A house and wealth are inherited from fathers, But a discreet wife is from Jehovah. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Laziness brings on a deep sleep, And a sluggish person* will go hungry. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The one who keeps the commandment keeps his life;* The one who is reckless about his ways will die. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one showing favor to the lowly is lending to Jehovah, And He will repay* him for what he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Discipline your son while there is hope, And do not become responsible for* his death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The hot-tempered man will pay the penalty; If you try to spare him, you will have to do it again and again. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Listen to counsel and accept discipline, In order to become wise in your future. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Many are the plans in a man’s heart, But the counsel* of Jehovah is what will prevail. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The desirable thing in a man is his loyal love; And it is better to be poor than to be a liar. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah leads to life; The one who has it will have a pleasant rest, free from harm. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The lazy one buries his hand in the banquet bowl, But he does not even bother to bring it back to his mouth. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Strike the ridiculer, so that the inexperienced one may become shrewd, And reprove the understanding one, so that he will increase in knowledge. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The one who mistreats his father and drives away his mother Is a son causing shame and disgrace. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>My son, if you stop listening to discipline, You will stray from the sayings of knowledge. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A worthless witness mocks justice, And the mouth of the wicked gulps down evil. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Judgment is in store for ridiculers, And beatings for the back of the stupid ones. </p><p><strong>20 </strong>Wine is a ridiculer, alcohol is unruly; Whoever goes astray by them is not wise.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The terror* of a king is like the growling of a lion;* Whoever provokes his anger risks his own life.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is honorable for a man to refrain from a dispute, But every fool will become embroiled in it.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The lazy one does not plow in winter, So he will be begging during the harvest when he has nothing.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The thoughts* of a man’s heart are like deep waters, But the discerning man draws them out.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Many men proclaim their loyal love, But who can find a faithful man?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The righteous one is walking in his integrity. Happy are his children* who come after him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>When the king sits on the throne to judge, He sifts out all evil with his eyes.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Who can say: “I have cleansed my heart; I am pure from my sin”? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Dishonest weights and false measures* —Both are detestable to Jehovah. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Even a child* is known by his actions, Whether his behavior is pure and right. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The hearing ear and the seeing eye —Jehovah has made both of them. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Do not love sleep, or you will come to poverty. Open your eyes, and you will be satisfied with bread. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“It is no good, it is no good!” says the buyer; Then he goes away and boasts about himself. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>There is gold, also much coral,* But the lips of knowledge are something precious. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Take a man’s garment if he has given security for a stranger; Seize the pledge from him if he did so for a foreign woman.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Bread gained by deceit tastes good to a man, But afterward his mouth will be full of gravel. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>By consultation,* plans will succeed,* And by skillful direction* wage your war. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk; Do not associate with one who loves to gossip.* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Whoever curses his father and his mother, His lamp will be extinguished when darkness comes. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>An inheritance obtained first by greed Will not be a blessing in the end. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Do not say: “I will pay back evil!” Hope in Jehovah, and he will save you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Dishonest weights* are detestable to Jehovah, And deceptive scales are not good. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>A man’s footsteps are directed by Jehovah; How can a man understand his own way?* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>It is a snare for a man to cry out rashly, “Holy!” And only later to give consideration to what he vowed. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>A wise king sifts out the wicked And drives the threshing wheel over them. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The breath of a man is the lamp of Jehovah, Searching through his innermost being. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Loyal love and faithfulness safeguard the king; By loyal love he sustains his throne. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The glory of young men is their strength, And the splendor of old men is their gray hair. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Bruises and wounds purge* away evil, And beatings cleanse one’s innermost being. </p><p><strong>21 </strong>A king’s heart is like streams of water in Jehovah’s hand. He directs it wherever He pleases.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right to him, But Jehovah examines the hearts.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>To do what is right and just Is more pleasing to Jehovah than a sacrifice.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Haughty eyes and an arrogant heart —The lamp that guides the wicked is sin.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The plans of the diligent surely lead to success,* But all who are hasty surely head for poverty.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Gaining treasures by a lying tongue Is like a vanishing mist, a deadly snare.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The violence of the wicked will sweep them away, For they refuse to act with justice.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The way of a guilty man is crooked, But the activity of the pure man is upright.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Better to dwell on a corner of the roof Than in the same house with a quarrelsome* wife. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The wicked man* craves what is bad; He shows no favor toward his neighbor. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When a ridiculer is punished, the inexperienced become wiser, And when a wise person receives insight, he gains knowledge.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked one; He overthrows the wicked to their ruin. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Whoever stops up his ear to the cry of the lowly one Will himself call and not be answered. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A secret gift subdues anger, And a hidden bribe,* fierce rage. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is a joy for the righteous one to act with justice, But it is something terrible to those who practice evil. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The man who strays from the way of insight Will rest in the company of those powerless in death. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who loves having a good time* will come to poverty; The one who loves wine and oil will not grow rich. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The wicked one is a ransom for the righteous one, And the treacherous one will be taken in place of the upright. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Better to dwell in the wilderness Than with a quarrelsome* and irritable wife. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Precious treasure and oil are found in the house of the wise, But the stupid man will squander* what he has. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal love Will find life, righteousness, and glory. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>A wise man can scale* the city of the mighty And undermine the strength in which they trust. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The one guarding his mouth and his tongue Keeps himself* out of trouble. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>A presumptuous, arrogant braggart is what you call The man who acts with reckless presumptuousness. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>What the lazy man craves will put him to death, For his hands refuse to work. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>All day long he greedily craves, But the righteous one gives, holding nothing back. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable. How much more when he offers it with evil intent!* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A lying witness will perish, But the man who listens will testify with success.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The wicked man puts on a bold face, But it is the upright one whose course is sure.* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The horse is prepared for the day of battle, But salvation belongs to Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “quietness.”</p><p>Lit., “sacrifices.”</p><p>Or “Grandchildren.”</p><p>Or “parents.”</p><p>Or “children.”</p><p>Or “Fine.”</p><p>Or “noble.”</p><p>Or “is a stone that brings favor.”</p><p>Lit., “covers over.”</p><p>Or “like opening a dam.” Lit., “letting out waters.”</p><p>Or “When he is lacking good sense?”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “go surety.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “good for healing.”</p><p>Or “dries up the bones.”</p><p>Lit., “a bribe from the bosom.”</p><p>Lit., “bitterness.”</p><p>Or “impose a fine on.”</p><p>Lit., “cool of spirit.”</p><p>Or “shows contempt for.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “like things to be swallowed greedily.”</p><p>Lit., “is raised high,” that is, out of reach, safe.</p><p>Or “complete despair?”</p><p>Or “searches him through.”</p><p>Lit., “separates.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “hastens with his feet.”</p><p>Or “generous man.”</p><p>Lit., “acquires heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Lit., “pass over.”</p><p>Or “a transgression.”</p><p>Or “a maned young lion.”</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “reward.”</p><p>Or “desire.” Lit., “raise your soul to.”</p><p>Or “purpose.”</p><p>Or “fearsomeness.”</p><p>Or “a maned young lion.”</p><p>Or possibly, “They will look during the harvest but find nothing.”</p><p>Or “intentions.” Lit., “counsel.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Or “Two different stone weights and two different measuring containers.”</p><p>Or “boy.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “a foreigner.”</p><p>Or “counsel.”</p><p>Or “be made firm.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “who entices with his lips.”</p><p>Or “Two different stone weights.”</p><p>Or “the way to go?”</p><p>Or “scour.”</p><p>Or “motives.”</p><p>Or “advantage.”</p><p>Or possibly, “for those seeking death.”</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>Or “The soul of the wicked one.”</p><p>Or “he knows what to do.”</p><p>Lit., “a bribe in the bosom.”</p><p>Or “loves pleasure.”</p><p>Or “nagging.”</p><p>Lit., “swallow.”</p><p>Or “prevail over.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “along with shameful conduct!”</p><p>Lit., “speak forever.”</p><p>Or “who makes his way sure.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
