<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 Wisdom Is Better Than Gold</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016368.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 12:1-16:33)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>The one who loves discipline loves knowledge, But the one who hates reproof is unreasoning.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The good person obtains Jehovah’s approval, But He condemns the man of wicked schemes.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>No man is made secure by wickedness, But the righteous will never be uprooted.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A capable wife is a crown to her husband, But the wife who acts shamefully is like rottenness in his bones.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The thoughts of the righteous are just, But the guidance of the wicked is deceptive.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The words of the wicked are a deadly ambush,* But the mouth of the upright saves them.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When the wicked are overthrown, they are no more, But the house of the righteous will keep standing.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>A man is praised for the discretion of his mouth, But one with a twisted heart will be treated with contempt.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Better to be lightly esteemed and have a servant Than to glorify oneself and have no food.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The righteous one takes care of his domestic animals,* But even the mercy of the wicked is cruel. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The one who cultivates his land will be satisfied with food, But the one pursuing worthless things is lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The wicked man envies what other evil men have caught, But the root of the righteous bears fruit. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The evil man is ensnared by his own sinful speech, But the righteous one escapes from distress. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of his speech* a man is satisfied with good, And the work of his hands will reward him. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The way of the fool is right in his own eyes, But the wise one accepts advice.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A fool immediately* shows his annoyance, But the shrewd man overlooks* an insult. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who testifies faithfully will tell the truth,* But a false witness speaks deceit. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, But the tongue of the wise is a healing. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Truthful lips will endure forever, But a lying tongue will last for only a moment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Deceit is in the heart of those who plot mischief, But those who promote* peace have joy. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>No harm will befall the righteous one, But the wicked will have their fill of calamity. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Lying lips are detestable to Jehovah, But those acting faithfully bring pleasure to him. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A shrewd man conceals what he knows, But the heart of the fool blurts out his foolishness. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The hand of the diligent ones will rule, But idle hands will be put to forced labor. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,* But a good word cheers it up. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The righteous one searches out his pastures, But the course of the wicked leads them astray. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The lazy do not chase after the prey, But diligence is a man’s precious treasure. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The path of righteousness leads to life; Along its pathway there is no death. </p><p><strong>13 </strong>A wise son accepts his father’s discipline, But the scoffer does not listen to a rebuke.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>From the fruitage of his speech* a man will eat what is good, But the very desire* of the treacherous is for violence.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The one guarding his mouth* protects his life,* But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The lazy person has his cravings, yet he* has nothing, But the diligent one* will be fully satisfied.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The righteous one hates lies, But the actions of the wicked bring shame and disgrace.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Righteousness protects the one whose way is innocent, But wickedness brings down the sinner.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>There is one who pretends to be rich, yet has nothing; There is another who pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Riches are the ransom for a man’s life,* But the poor are not even threatened.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The light of the righteous shines brightly,* But the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Presumptuousness leads only to strife, But wisdom belongs to those who seek advice.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Wealth quickly gained* will dwindle, But the wealth of the one who gathers it little by little* will increase. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Expectation* postponed makes the heart sick, But a desire realized is a tree of life. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Whoever despises instruction* will pay the penalty, But the one who respects the commandment will be rewarded. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The teaching* of the wise one is a source of life To turn one away from the snares of death. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Keen insight wins favor, But the way of the treacherous is harsh. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The shrewd person acts with knowledge, But the fool exposes his own foolishness. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>A wicked messenger falls into trouble, But a faithful envoy brings healing. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Whoever neglects discipline comes to poverty and disgrace, But the one accepting correction* will be glorified. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Desire when realized is sweet to a person,* But the stupid hate to turn away from bad. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one walking with the wise will become wise, But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Calamity pursues sinners, But prosperity rewards the righteous. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The good person leaves an inheritance to his grandchildren, But the sinner’s wealth will be stored up for the righteous one. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The plowed field of the poor yields much food, But it* may be swept away by injustice. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Whoever holds back his rod* hates his son, But the one who loves him disciplines him diligently.* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The righteous one eats and satisfies his appetite,* But the stomach of the wicked is empty. </p><p><strong>14 </strong>The truly wise woman builds up her house, But the foolish one tears it down with her own hands.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The one walking in his uprightness fears Jehovah, But the one whose ways are devious* despises Him.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The rod of haughtiness is in the mouth of the fool, But the lips of the wise will protect them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Where there are no cattle the manger is clean, But the power of a bull yields an abundant harvest.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A faithful witness will not lie, But a false witness lies with every breath.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none, But knowledge comes easily to the person with understanding.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Stay away from the foolish man, For you will not find knowledge on his lips.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>By wisdom the shrewd man understands the way he is going, But the stupid are deceived* by their foolishness.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Fools make fun of guilt,* But among the upright, there is a willingness to reconcile.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The heart knows its own bitterness,* And no outsider can share in its joy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The house of the wicked will be destroyed, But the tent of the upright will flourish. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Even in laughter the heart may feel pain, And rejoicing may end in grief. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The one wayward at heart will reap the results of his ways, But the good man reaps the reward of his dealings. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The naive* person believes every word, But the shrewd one ponders each step. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The wise one is cautious and turns away from evil, But the stupid one is reckless* and overconfident. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who is quick to anger acts foolishly, But the man who thinks things out* is hated. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The naive* will inherit foolishness, But the shrewd are crowned with knowledge. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Bad people will have to bow down before the good, And the wicked will bow at the gates of the righteous. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The poor man is hated even by his neighbors, But many are the friends of the rich person. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The one who despises his neighbor sins, But whoever shows compassion to the lowly is happy. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Will not those who plot mischief go astray? But those intent on doing good will receive loyal love and faithfulness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>There is benefit in every kind of hard work, But mere talk leads to want. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The crown of the wise is their wealth; But the foolishness of the stupid is only foolishness. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>A true witness saves lives,* But a deceitful one lies with every breath. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah, And it will be a refuge for his children. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, To turn one away from the snares of death. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A multitude of people are a king’s majesty, But a ruler without subjects is ruined. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The one who is slow to anger has great discernment, But the impatient one displays his foolishness. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>A calm heart gives life* to the body, But jealousy is rottenness to the bones. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker, But whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The wicked one will be brought down by his own evil, But the righteous one will find refuge in his integrity. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Wisdom rests quietly in the heart of an understanding person, But among the stupid it must make itself known. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Righteousness exalts a nation, But sin is disgraceful to a people. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The king finds pleasure in a servant who acts with insight, But his fury is against the one who acts shamefully. </p><p><strong>15 </strong>A mild* answer turns away rage, But a harsh* word stirs up anger.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The tongue of the wise makes good use of knowledge, But the mouth of the stupid blurts out foolishness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The eyes of Jehovah are everywhere, Watching both the bad and the good.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A calm tongue* is a tree of life, But twisted speech causes despair.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A fool disrespects his father’s discipline, But a shrewd person accepts correction.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In the house of the righteous one there is abundant treasure, But the produce* of the wicked one brings him trouble.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The lips of the wise spread knowledge, But not so the heart of the stupid one.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah, But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah detests the way of the wicked one, But he loves the one who pursues righteousness. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Discipline seems bad* to one forsaking the way, But whoever hates reproof will die. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The Grave* and the place of destruction* are in full view of Jehovah. How much more so the hearts of men! <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The scoffer does not love the one correcting* him. He will not consult the wise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A joyful heart makes for a cheerful countenance, But heartache crushes the spirit. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The understanding heart seeks knowledge, But the mouth of the stupid feeds on* foolishness. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All the days of the afflicted one are bad, But the one with a cheerful* heart has a continual feast. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Better is a little in the fear of Jehovah Than great wealth along with anxiety.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Better is a dish of vegetables where there is love Than a fattened* bull where there is hatred. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A hot-tempered man stirs up strife, But one who is slow to anger calms a quarrel. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The way of the lazy one is like a hedge of thorns, But the path of the upright is like a level highway. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a stupid man despises his mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Foolishness is a joy to one lacking good sense,* But the man of discernment walks straight ahead. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Plans fail when there is no consultation,* But there is accomplishment through many advisers.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>A man rejoices in giving the right answer,* And a word spoken at the right time—how good it is! <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The path of life leads upward to one with insight, To turn him away from the Grave* below. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Jehovah will tear down the house of the haughty, But he will preserve the boundary of the widow. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Jehovah detests the schemes of the wicked one, But pleasant sayings are pure to Him. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one making dishonest profit brings trouble* on his own household, But the one hating bribes will keep living. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The heart of the righteous one meditates before answering,* But the mouth of the wicked blurts out bad things. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Jehovah is far away from the wicked, But he hears the prayer of the righteous. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Bright eyes make* the heart rejoice; A good report invigorates the bones.* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The one who listens to life-giving reproof Is at home among the wise. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone refusing discipline despises his life,* But whoever listens to reproof acquires understanding.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is a training in wisdom, And before glory there is humility. </p><p><strong>16 </strong>A man prepares the thoughts of his heart,* But the answer he gives* is from Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All of a man’s ways seem right* to him, But Jehovah examines the motives.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Commit to Jehovah whatever you do,* And your plans will succeed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made everything work for his purpose, Even the wicked for the day of disaster.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Everyone proud in heart is detestable to Jehovah. Be assured* that he will not go unpunished.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By loyal love and faithfulness, error is atoned for, And by fearing Jehovah one turns away from bad.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When Jehovah is pleased with a man’s ways, He causes even his enemies to be at peace with him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Better is a little with righteousness Than a large income without justice.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A man may plot out his course in his heart, But it is Jehovah who directs his steps. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Inspired* decision should be on the lips of a king; He must never betray justice. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Honest balances and scales are from Jehovah; All the weights in the bag are his doing. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Wicked practices are detestable to kings, For the throne is firmly established by righteousness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteous speech is a pleasure to kings. They love someone who speaks honestly. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The king’s rage is like a messenger of death, But the wise man appeases* it. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>In the light of the king’s face there is life; His favor is like a cloud of rain in spring. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is to be chosen over silver. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The highway of the upright avoids what is bad. Whoever safeguards his way preserves his life.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Pride is before a crash, And a haughty spirit before stumbling. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Better to be humble* among the meek Than to share the spoil of the haughty. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The one who shows insight in a matter will find success,* And happy is the one trusting in Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The wise in heart will be called understanding, And the one kind in speech* adds persuasiveness. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Insight is a fountain of life to those possessing it, But fools are disciplined by their own foolishness. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The heart of the wise one gives his mouth insight And adds persuasiveness to his speech. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pleasant sayings are a honeycomb, Sweet to the soul* and a healing to the bones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There is a way that seems right to a man, But in the end it leads to death. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The appetite* of a laborer makes him work hard For his hunger* urges him on. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A worthless man digs up what is bad; His speech is like a scorching fire. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>A troublemaker* causes dissension, And a slanderer separates close friends. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>A violent man entices his neighbor And leads him in the wrong way. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>He winks his eye as he schemes harm. He pinches his lips together as he carries out mischief. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Gray hair is a crown of beauty* When it is found in the way of righteousness. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The one slow to anger is better than a mighty man, And the one controlling his temper* than one conquering a city. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The lot is cast into the lap, But every decision by it is from Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “has no sense.”</p><p>Lit., “lie in wait for blood.”</p><p>Lit., “bread.”</p><p>Or “the soul of his domestic animal.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “counsel.”</p><p>Or “in the same day.”</p><p>Lit., “covers over.”</p><p>Lit., “what is righteous.”</p><p>Lit., “those who are counselors of.”</p><p>Or “depresses him.”</p><p>Or “correction.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “what he says.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “will be made fat.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “hear no rebuke.”</p><p>Lit., “rejoices.”</p><p>Or “those consulting together.”</p><p>Or “Wealth from vanity.”</p><p>Lit., “gathers by hand.”</p><p>Or “Hope.”</p><p>Or “the word.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “reproof.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “he.”</p><p>Or “discipline; punishment.”</p><p>Or possibly, “promptly.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “crooked.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the stupid deceive others.”</p><p>Or “of making amends.”</p><p>Or “there is goodwill.”</p><p>Or “the bitterness of its soul.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Or “furious.”</p><p>Or “the man of thinking abilities.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “health.”</p><p>Or “gentle.”</p><p>Or “painful.”</p><p>Or “A tongue of healing.”</p><p>Lit., “the crushing of the spirit.”</p><p>Or “reproof.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “severe.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “and Abaddon.”</p><p>Or “reproving.”</p><p>Or “pursues.”</p><p>Or “good.”</p><p>Or “confusion.”</p><p>Lit., “manger-fed.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “confidential talk.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Lit., “in the answer of his mouth.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>Or “carefully considers how to answer; thinks before speaking.”</p><p>Or “A cheerful glance makes.”</p><p>Lit., “makes the bones fat.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “heart.”</p><p>Lit., “The arrangings of the heart belong to a man.”</p><p>Or “the right answer.” Lit., “the answer of the tongue.”</p><p>Lit., “pure.”</p><p>Lit., “spirits.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll to Jehovah your works.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p><p>Or “Divine.”</p><p>Or “avoids.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “lowly of spirit.”</p><p>Lit., “good.”</p><p>Or “And appealing speech.” Lit., “And sweetness of lips.”</p><p>Or “taste.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p><p>Or “A schemer.”</p><p>Or “glory.”</p><p>Lit., “ruling over his spirit.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
