<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 11 Moral Refinements—Reflecting God’s Holiness</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014250.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ezek. 40:1-48:35)</strong> <span id="citation7"></span>In the 25th year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month, in the 14th year after the city had fallen, on that very day the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he took me to the city. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>By means of visions from God, he brought me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain, on which there was a structure like a city to the south. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When he brought me there, I saw a man whose appearance was like that of copper. He had a flax cord and a measuring reed* in his hand, and he was standing in the gateway. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The man said to me: “Son of man, look closely, listen carefully, and pay attention* to everything I show you, for that is why you were brought here. Tell the house of Israel everything that you see.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I saw a wall surrounding the outside of the temple.* In the man’s hand was a measuring reed six cubits long (to each cubit, a handbreadth was added).* He began to measure the wall, and its thickness was one reed and its height was one reed. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then he came to the gate that faced east and climbed its steps. When he measured the threshold of the gate, its width was one reed, and the width of the other threshold was also one reed. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Each guard chamber was one reed long and one reed wide, and there were five cubits between the guard chambers. The threshold of the gate beside the porch of the gate facing the interior measured one reed. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He measured the porch of the gate toward the interior, and it was one reed. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He then measured the porch of the gate, which was eight cubits; and he measured its side pillars, which were two cubits; and the porch of the gate was on the side facing the interior. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>There were three guard chambers on each side of the east gate. The three were the same size, and the side pillars on either side were the same size. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Then he measured the width of the entrance of the gate, which was 10 cubits; and the length of the gate was 13 cubits. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The partitioned area in front of the guard chambers on either side was one cubit. The guard chambers on both sides were six cubits each. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He then measured the gate from the roof of the one guard chamber* to the roof of the other, and it was 25 cubits wide; one entrance was across from the other entrance. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Then he measured the side pillars, which were 60 cubits tall, as well as the side pillars in the gates all around the courtyard. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>From the front of the entrance of the gate to the front of the porch on the inner side of the gate was 50 cubits. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There were windows with narrowing frames* for the guard chambers and for their side pillars inside the gate on each side. The interior of the porches also had windows on each side, and there were palm-tree figures on the side pillars. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He then brought me into the outer courtyard, and I saw dining rooms* and a pavement around the courtyard. There were 30 dining rooms on the pavement. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The pavement at the side of the gates corresponded to the length of the gates—this was the lower pavement. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Then he measured the distance* from the front of the lower gate to the perimeter of the inner courtyard. It was 100 cubits on the east and on the north. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The outer courtyard had a gate facing north, and he measured its length and its width. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>There were three guard chambers on each side. Its side pillars and porch had the same measurements as the first gate. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Its windows, its porch, and its palm-tree figures were the same size as those of the east gate. People could reach it by climbing seven steps, and its porch was in front of them. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>There was a gate in the inner courtyard opposite the north gate and one opposite the east gate. He measured the distance from gate to gate, and it was 100 cubits. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Next he brought me toward the south, and I saw a gate on the south side. He measured its side pillars and its porch, and they were the same size as the others. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There were windows on each side of it and its porch, like the other windows. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>There were seven steps leading up to it, and its porch was in front of them. And it had palm-tree figures on its side pillars, one on each side. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The inner courtyard had a gate facing south; he measured southward from gate to gate, and the distance was 100 cubits. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Next he brought me into the inner courtyard through the south gate; when he measured the south gate, it was the same size as the others. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same size as the others. There were windows on each side of it and its porch. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>There were porches all around; they were 25 cubits long and 5 cubits wide. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Its porch faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>When he brought me into the inner courtyard from the east, he measured the gate, and it was the same size as the others. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same size as the others, and there were windows on each side of it and its porch. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Its porch faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on both of its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He then brought me into the north gate and measured it; it was the same size as the others. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Its guard chambers, its side pillars, and its porch were the same as the others. It had windows on each side. It was 50 cubits long and 25 cubits wide. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Its side pillars faced the outer courtyard, and there were palm-tree figures on both of its side pillars, and eight steps led up to it. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>A dining room with its entrance was near the side pillars of the gates, where the whole burnt offerings were washed. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>There were two tables on each side of the porch of the gate on which to slaughter the whole burnt offerings, the sin offerings, and the guilt offerings. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>On the way up to the north gate, there were two tables outside the entrance. There were also two tables inside, in the porch of the gate. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>There were four tables on each side of the gate—eight tables in all—on which the sacrifices were slaughtered. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>The four tables for the whole burnt offering were of hewn stone. They were one and a half cubits long, one and a half cubits wide, and one cubit high. On them were kept the implements used to slaughter the burnt offerings and the sacrifices. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Shelves, one handbreadth wide, were attached all around the interior walls; and the flesh of the gift offerings would be placed on the tables. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>Outside the inner gate were the dining rooms for the singers; they were in the inner courtyard near the north gate, facing south. Another dining room was near the east gate, facing north. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>He said to me: “This dining room that faces south is for the priests who are responsible for the services in the temple. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>The dining room that faces north is for the priests who are responsible for the service of the altar. They are the sons of Zaʹdok, those from the Levites who are assigned to approach Jehovah to minister to him.” <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Then he measured the inner courtyard. It was 100 cubits long and 100 cubits wide, foursquare. The altar was in front of the temple. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>Then he brought me into the porch of the temple, and he measured the side pillar of the porch, and it was five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other side. The width of the gate was three cubits on one side and three cubits on the other side. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>The porch was 20 cubits long and 11* cubits wide. People would reach it by climbing the steps. There were pillars by the side posts, one on each side. </p><p><strong>41 </strong>Then he brought me into the outer sanctuary,* and he measured the side pillars; they were six cubits* wide on one side and six cubits wide on the other side. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The entrance was ten cubits wide, and the sidewalls* of the entrance were five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other side. He measured its length, which was 40 cubits, and its width, 20 cubits. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He then went inside* and measured the side pillar of the entrance, and it was two cubits thick, and the entrance was six cubits wide. The sidewalls of the entrance were* seven cubits. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Next he measured the room facing the outer sanctuary, and it was 20 cubits long and 20 cubits wide. And he said to me: “This is the Most Holy.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then he measured the wall of the temple, and it was six cubits thick. The side chambers around the temple were four cubits wide. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The side chambers were three stories high, one on top of the other, with 30 chambers on each story. There were ledges around the wall of the temple that served as supports for the side chambers, so that the supports did not go into the wall of the temple itself. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>On both sides of the temple was a winding passage* that widened as it ascended to the upper chambers. The width increased from story to story as one ascended from the lowest story to the uppermost story by passing through the middle story. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I saw that there was a raised platform all around the temple, and the foundations of the side chambers measured a full reed of six cubits to the corner. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The width of the outside wall of the side chambers was five cubits. There was an open space* alongside the structure of the side chambers that was part of the temple. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Between the temple and the dining rooms* was an area that was 20 cubits wide on each side. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>There was an entrance between the side chambers and the open space on the north side and another entrance on the south side. The width of the open space was five cubits all around. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The building that was on the west facing the open area was 70 cubits wide and 90 cubits long; the wall of the building was five cubits thick all around. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He measured the temple, and it was 100 cubits long. The open area, the building,* and its walls were also 100 cubits long. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The width of the front of the temple facing east and the open area was 100 cubits. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He measured the length of the building that faced the open area in the rear, along with its galleries on both sides, and it was 100 cubits. He also measured the outer sanctuary, the inner sanctuary, and the porches of the courtyard, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>as well as the thresholds, the windows with narrowing frames, and the galleries that were in those three areas. Near the threshold were wood panels from the floor up to the windows; and the windows were covered. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Measurements were taken above the entrance and in the inner temple and on the outside and on the entire wall all around. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It had carved cherubs and palm-tree figures, with each palm tree between two cherubs, and each cherub had two faces. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The human face was toward the palm tree on one side, and the face of a lion* was toward the palm tree on the other side. They were carved this way throughout the entire temple. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>From the floor to the area above the entrance were carved cherubs and palm-tree figures on the wall of the sanctuary. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The doorposts* of the sanctuary were square. In front of the holy place* was something like <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>a wooden altar that was three cubits high and two cubits long. It had corner posts, and its base* and its sides were made of wood. He then said to me: “This is the table that is before Jehovah.” <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The outer sanctuary and the holy place each had two doors. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The doors had two swinging leaves, two leaves for each door. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There were carved cherubs and palm-tree figures on the doors of the sanctuary, like those on the walls. There was also a wooden overhang* on the front of the porch on the outside. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>There were also windows with narrowing frames and palm-tree figures along both sides of the porch, as well as along the side chambers of the temple and the overhangs. </p><p><strong>42 </strong>Then he led me to the outer courtyard toward the north. And he brought me to the dining-room block that was next to the open area, north of the adjoining building. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Its length at the north entrance was 100 cubits,* and it was 50 cubits wide. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It was located between the inner courtyard, which was 20 cubits wide, and the pavement of the outer courtyard. Its galleries faced each other and were three stories high. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Before the dining rooms* was an inner walkway 10 cubits wide and 100 cubits long,* and their entrances were to the north. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The upper dining rooms of the building were narrower than those in the lower and middle stories, because the galleries took up more of their space. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For they were three stories high, but they had no pillars like the pillars of the courtyards. That is why more floor space was taken away from them than from the lower and middle stories. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The outer stone wall near the dining rooms toward the outer courtyard that faced the other dining rooms was 50 cubits long. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For the length of the dining rooms that were toward the outer courtyard was 50 cubits, but for those facing the sanctuary, it was 100 cubits. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The dining rooms had an entryway on the east side leading up to them from the outer courtyard. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>There were also dining rooms inside* the stone wall of the courtyard toward the east, near the open area and the building. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>There was a walkway before them like that of the northern dining rooms. They were the same length and width, and they had the same exits and layouts. Their entrances <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>were like the entrances of the dining rooms that were toward the south. There was an entrance at the beginning of the walkway, before the adjacent stone wall toward the east, where one could enter. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Then he said to me: “The dining rooms of the north and the dining rooms of the south that are next to the open area are the holy dining rooms where the priests who are approaching Jehovah eat the most holy offerings. There they place the most holy offerings, the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, because the place is holy. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When the priests enter, they should not go out of the holy place to the outer courtyard without first removing the garments in which they minister, for these are holy. They will clothe themselves with other garments in order to approach the areas permitted to the people.” <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When he finished measuring the inner temple area,* he led me out by way of the gate that faces east, and he measured the entire area. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He measured the eastern side with the measuring reed.* According to the measuring reed, it was 500 reed lengths from one side to the other. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He measured the northern side, and according to the measuring reed, it was 500 reed lengths. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He measured the southern side, and according to the measuring reed, it was 500 reed lengths. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He went around to the western side. He measured 500 reed lengths with the measuring reed. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He measured it on the four sides. It had a wall all around it that was 500 reeds long and 500 reeds wide, to make a division between what is holy and what is for common use. </p><p><strong>43 </strong>Then he led me to the gate that is facing east. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>There I saw the glory of the God of Israel coming from the east, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters; and the earth was illuminated by his glory. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>What I saw was like the vision I had seen when I* came to bring the city to ruin, and it appeared to be like what I had seen near the river Cheʹbar; and I fell with my face to the ground. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then the glory of Jehovah entered the temple* through the gate facing the east. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A spirit then raised me up and brought me into the inner courtyard, and I saw that the temple had become full of the glory of Jehovah. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then I heard someone speaking to me out of the temple, and the man came and stood beside me. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He said to me: “Son of man, this is the place of my throne and the place for the soles of my feet, where I will dwell among the people of Israel forever. The house of Israel will no longer defile my holy name, they and their kings, by their spiritual prostitution and by the carcasses of their kings at their death. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>By putting their threshold next to my threshold and their doorpost beside my doorpost, with only a wall between me and them, they defiled my holy name by the detestable things they did, so I exterminated them in my anger. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Now let them put their spiritual prostitution and the carcasses of their kings far away from me, and I will dwell among them forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>“As for you, son of man, describe the temple to the house of Israel, so that they will feel ashamed because of their errors, and they should study its plan.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If they feel ashamed of all they have done, you should make known to them the ground plan of the temple, its arrangement, its exits, and its entrances. Show them all its ground plans and its statutes, its ground plans and its laws, and write them down before their eyes, so that they may observe all its ground plan and carry out its statutes. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>This is the law of the temple. The entire territory all around the top of the mountain is most holy. Look! This is the law of the temple. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“These are the measurements of the altar in cubits (to each cubit a handbreadth was added).* Its base is a cubit, and it is a cubit wide. It has a border all around the edge that is one span* in width. This is the base of the altar. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From the base on the floor to the lower surrounding ledge is two cubits, and its width is one cubit. From the small surrounding ledge to the big surrounding ledge is four cubits, and its width is a cubit. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The altar hearth is four cubits high, and projecting up from the altar hearth are the four horns. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The altar hearth is square, 12 cubits long and 12 cubits wide. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The four sides of the surrounding ledge are 14 cubits long and 14 cubits wide; and the surrounding border is half a cubit, and its base is a cubit on all sides. “And its steps are facing east.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He then said to me, “Son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘These are the directions to follow when the altar is made, so that whole burnt offerings may be offered and blood may be sprinkled on it.’ <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“‘You are to give a young bull of the herd as a sin offering to the Levitical priests of the offspring of Zaʹdok, who approach me to minister to me,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>‘You should take some of its blood and put it on the four horns of the altar, on the four corners of the surrounding ledge, and on the border all around, in order to purify it from sin and to make atonement for it. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Then take the young bull, the sin offering, in order to burn it in the appointed place of the temple, outside the sanctuary. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>On the second day you will offer a sound male goat as a sin offering; and they will purify the altar from sin just as they purified it from sin with the young bull.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“‘When you finish purifying it from sin, you will offer a sound young bull of the herd and a sound ram from the flock. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You are to present them to Jehovah, and the priests must throw salt on them and offer them up as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>For seven days you will offer a male goat as a daily sin offering, as well as a young bull of the herd and a ram of the flock; you will offer unblemished* animals. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For seven days they are to make atonement for the altar, and they must cleanse it and install it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When the days are completed, on the eighth day and thereafter, the priests will offer your* whole burnt offerings and communion sacrifices on the altar; and I will find pleasure in you,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.” </p><p><strong>44 </strong>He brought me back by way of the outer gate of the sanctuary facing east, and it was shut. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah said to me: “This gate will remain shut. It is not to be opened, and no human will enter by it; for Jehovah, the God of Israel, has entered through it, so it must remain shut. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>However, the chieftain will sit in it to eat bread before Jehovah, for he is a chieftain. He will come in through the porch of the gate, and he will go out through it.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then he brought me through the north gate to the front of the temple. When I looked, I saw that the glory of Jehovah had filled the temple of Jehovah. So I fell with my face to the ground. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah said to me: “Son of man, pay attention,* watch, and listen carefully to everything I tell you about the statutes and the laws of the temple of Jehovah. Pay close attention to the entryway of the temple and all the exits of the sanctuary. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You must say to the rebellious house of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “That is enough of your detestable practices, O house of Israel. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When you bring foreigners who are uncircumcised in heart and flesh into my sanctuary, they profane my temple. You present my bread, fat and blood, while my covenant is being broken because of all your detestable practices. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You have not taken care of my holy things. Instead, you assign others to take care of the duties in my sanctuary.”’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “No foreigner living in Israel who is uncircumcised in heart and in flesh may enter my sanctuary.”’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>“‘But the Levites who strayed far from me when Israel strayed from me to follow their disgusting idols* will bear the consequences of their error. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And they will become ministers in my sanctuary to oversee the gates of the temple and to minister at the temple. They will slaughter the whole burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they will stand before the people to minister to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Because they ministered to them before their disgusting idols and became a stumbling block causing the house of Israel to sin, that is why I have raised my hand against them in an oath,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘and they will bear the consequences of their error. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They will not approach me to serve as my priests or approach any of my holy or most holy things, and they will bear their shame because of the detestable things that they did. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>But I will make them caretakers of the responsibilities of the temple, to take care of its service and all the things that should be done in it.’ <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>“‘As for the Levitical priests, the sons of Zaʹdok, who took care of the responsibilities of my sanctuary when the Israelites strayed from me, they will approach me to minister to me, and they will stand before me to offer me the fat and the blood,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>‘They are the ones who will enter my sanctuary, and they will approach my table to minister to me, and they will take care of their responsibilities to me. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“‘When they come into the gates of the inner courtyard, they should wear linen garments. They should not wear any wool when they minister in the gates of the inner courtyard or inside it. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They should wear linen turbans on their head, and linen shorts should cover their hips. They should not wear anything that makes them perspire. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Before they go out to the outer courtyard—the outer courtyard where the people are—they should remove the garments they were ministering in and place them in the holy dining rooms.* Then they will put on other garments, so that they will not transmit holiness to* the people with their garments. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>They should not shave their head or let the hair of their head grow long. They should trim the hair of their heads. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The priests should not drink wine when they enter the inner courtyard. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>They should not take a widow or a divorced woman as a wife; but they may marry either a virgin of the offspring of Israel or the widow of a priest.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“‘They should instruct my people about the difference between what is holy and what is common; and they will teach them the difference between what is unclean and what is clean. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They should preside as judges in a legal case; they must judge it in harmony with my judicial decisions. They should keep my laws and my statutes regarding all my festivals and sanctify my sabbaths. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>They should not approach any dead human, or they will become unclean. However, they may make themselves unclean for their father, mother, son, daughter, brother, or an unmarried sister. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>And after the purification of a priest, they should count off seven days for him. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>On the day he enters into the holy place, into the inner courtyard, to minister in the holy place, he should present his sin offering,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘And this will be their inheritance: I am their inheritance. You should not give them any possession in Israel, for I am their possession. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>They will be the ones to eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, and every devoted thing in Israel will become theirs. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The choicest of all the first ripe fruits and every sort of contribution from you will belong to the priests. And you should give the firstfruits of your coarse meal to the priest. This will cause a blessing to rest on your households. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The priests should not eat any bird or animal that was found dead or torn to pieces.’ </p><p><strong>45 </strong>“‘When you allot the land as an inheritance, you should offer as a contribution to Jehovah a holy portion out of the land. Its length should be 25,000 cubits,* and its width, 10,000 cubits. Its entire area* will be a holy portion. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Within this will be a square lot for the holy place measuring 500 cubits by 500 cubits,* and it will have 50 cubits as pastures on each side. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Out of this measurement you should measure the length of 25,000 and the width of 10,000, and within it will be the sanctuary, something most holy. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>It will be a holy portion of the land for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who approach to minister to Jehovah. It will be a place for their houses and a sacred place for the sanctuary. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>“‘For the Levites, the ministers of the temple, there will be a portion 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits wide, and they will have 20 dining rooms* as a possession. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“‘You should give the possession of the city an area that is 25,000 cubits long (corresponding to the holy contribution) and 5,000 cubits wide. It will belong to all the house of Israel. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>“‘And for the chieftain there will be land on both sides of the holy contribution and of the area allotted to the city. It will be next to the holy contribution and the possession of the city. It will be on the west side and on the east side. Its length from the western boundary to the eastern boundary will correspond to one of the tribal portions. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>This land will become his possession in Israel. My chieftains will no longer mistreat my people, and they will give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘You have gone far enough, chieftains of Israel!’ “‘Put an end to your violence and oppression, and do what is just and righteous. Stop seizing the property of my people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>‘You should use accurate scales, an accurate eʹphah measure* and an accurate bath measure.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>There should be a fixed measurement for the eʹphah measure and the bath measure. The bath measure should hold a tenth of a hoʹmer,* and the eʹphah measure should hold a tenth of a hoʹmer. The hoʹmer will be the standard for measuring. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The shekel* is to be 20 geʹrahs.* And 20 shekels plus 25 shekels plus 15 shekels will make up one maʹneh* for you.’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“‘This is the contribution that you should offer: one sixth of an eʹphah from each hoʹmer of wheat and one sixth of an eʹphah from each hoʹmer of barley. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The allowance of the oil is to be based on the bath measure. The bath is a tenth of a cor,* and ten baths are a hoʹmer, for ten baths equal a hoʹmer. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And from the flock of the livestock of Israel, one sheep out of every 200 should be given. These will be for the grain offering, the whole burnt offering, and the communion sacrifices, in order to make atonement for the people,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>“‘All the people of the land will make this contribution to the chieftain in Israel. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But the chieftain will be responsible for the whole burnt offerings, the grain offering, and the drink offering during the festivals, the new moons, the Sabbaths, and all the designated festivals of the house of Israel. He will be the one to provide the sin offering, the grain offering, the whole burnt offering, and the communion sacrifices, in order to make atonement in behalf of the house of Israel.’ <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In the first month, on the first day of the month, you should take a sound young bull of the herd, and you are to purify the sanctuary from sin. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The priest will take some of the blood of the sin offering and put it on the doorpost of the temple, on the four corners of the surrounding ledge of the altar, and on the doorpost of the gate of the inner courtyard. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>That is what you will do on the seventh day of the month because of anyone who sins by mistake or through ignorance; and you are to make atonement for the temple. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>“‘In the first month, on the 14th day of the month, you will observe the festival of the Passover. For seven days unleavened bread should be eaten. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>On that day the chieftain will provide a young bull as a sin offering in his own behalf and in behalf of all the people of the land. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For the seven days of the festival he will provide as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah seven sound young bulls and seven sound rams each of the seven days, as well as a male goat each day as a sin offering. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He should also provide as a grain offering an eʹphah for each young bull and an eʹphah for each ram, as well as a hin* of oil for each eʹphah. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>“‘In the seventh month, on the 15th day of the month, for seven days during the festival, he should provide the same sin offering, whole burnt offering, grain offering, and oil.’” </p><p><strong>46 </strong>“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘The gate of the inner courtyard that is facing east should remain shut for the six workdays, but on the Sabbath day and on the day of the new moon it should be opened. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The chieftain will enter from outside by way of the porch of the gate, and he will stand by the doorpost of the gate. The priests will offer his whole burnt offering and his communion sacrifices, and he will bow down at the threshold of the gate and then go out. But the gate should not be shut until the evening. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The people of the land will also bow down before Jehovah at the entrance of that gate on the Sabbaths and on the new moons. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“‘The whole burnt offering that the chieftain will present to Jehovah on the Sabbath day should consist of six sound male lambs and a sound ram. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The grain offering will be an eʹphah* for the ram and whatever he is able to give for the male lambs, along with a hin* of oil with each eʹphah. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>On the day of the new moon the offering will consist of a sound young bull of the herd, six male lambs, and a ram; they should be sound ones. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He should offer as a grain offering an eʹphah for the young bull, an eʹphah for the ram, and whatever he can afford for the male lambs. And he should offer a hin of oil with each eʹphah. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>“‘When the chieftain enters, he should enter by way of the porch of the gate, and he should go out the same way. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>And when the people of the land come in before Jehovah during the festivals, those who come in to worship through the north gate should go out through the south gate, and those who come in through the south gate should go out through the north gate. No one should go back by way of the gate through which he entered, for they should exit through the gate that is opposite them. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>As for the chieftain who is among them, he should come in when they come in, and he should go out when they go out. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>During the festivals and the festal seasons the grain offering should be an eʹphah for the young bull, an eʹphah for the ram, and whatever he is able to give for the male lambs, along with a hin of oil with each eʹphah. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“‘If the chieftain provides a whole burnt offering or communion sacrifices as a voluntary offering to Jehovah, the gate facing east will be opened for him, and he will provide his whole burnt offering and his communion sacrifices just as he does on the Sabbath day. After he goes out, the gate should be shut behind him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“‘Each day you should provide a sound male lamb in its first year as a whole burnt offering to Jehovah. You should do this morning by morning. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Along with it, each morning you should provide a sixth of an eʹphah as a grain offering, along with a third of a hin of oil for sprinkling on the fine flour as a regular grain offering to Jehovah. This is a lasting statute. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>They must provide the male lamb, the grain offering, and the oil each morning as a regular whole burnt offering.’ <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘If the chieftain gives a gift to each one of his sons as an inheritance, it will become the property of his sons. It is their possession by inheritance. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But if he gives a gift from his inheritance to one of his servants, it will be his until the year of liberty; and then it will return to the chieftain. Only the inheritance of his sons will be permanently theirs. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The chieftain should not take any of the inheritance of the people by forcing them off their property. He should give his sons an inheritance from his own property, so that no one among my people may be driven from his property.’” <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Then he brought me in by the entryway that was beside the gate leading to the holy dining rooms* of the priests, which faced north, and there I saw a place at the rear toward the west. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He said to me: “This is the place where the priests will boil the guilt offering and the sin offering and where they will bake the grain offering, so that they will not carry anything out to the outer courtyard and transmit holiness to* the people.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He brought me out to the outer courtyard and led me past the four corners of the courtyard, and I saw a courtyard by each corner of the outer courtyard. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>At the four corners of the courtyard were small courtyards, 40 cubits* long and 30 cubits wide. All four of them were the same size.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>There were ledges* all around the four of them, and beneath the ledges were built places to boil the offerings. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Then he said to me: “These are the houses where the ministers of the temple boil the sacrifice of the people.” </p><p><strong>47 </strong>Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there I saw water flowing eastward from under the threshold of the temple, for the front of the temple was facing east. The water was flowing down from under the right side of the temple, south of the altar. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He then led me out by way of the north gate and took me outside and around to the outer gate that is facing east, and I saw water trickling from the right side. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the man went out toward the east with a measuring line in his hand, he measured off 1,000 cubits* and had me pass through the water; the water was ankle deep. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then he measured off another 1,000 and had me pass through the water, and it was up to the knees. He measured off another 1,000 and had me pass through, and the water was up to the hips. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>When he measured off another 1,000, it was a torrent that I was unable to walk across, for the water was so deep that one had to swim, a torrent of water that could not be crossed on foot. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He asked me: “Have you seen this, son of man?” Then he had me walk and return to the bank of the stream. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When I returned, I saw that on the bank of the stream were very many trees on both sides. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then he said to me: “This water flows toward the eastern region and continues down through the Arʹa·bah* and enters the sea. When it enters the sea, the water there will be healed. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Swarms of living creatures* will be able to live wherever the waters* flow. There will be an abundance of fish, because this water will flow there. The seawater will be healed, and everything will live wherever the stream goes. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>“Fishermen will stand beside it from En-gedʹi clear to En-egʹla·im, where there will be a drying yard for dragnets. There will be an abundance of many kinds of fish, like the fish of the Great Sea.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>“It will have swampy places and marshy places, and these will not be healed. They will be abandoned to salt. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“All sorts of trees for food will grow on both banks of the stream. Their leaves will not wither; nor will their fruitage fail. Each month they will bear new fruit, because the water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruitage will serve as food and their leaves for healing.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “This is the territory that you will assign as the land inheritance of the 12 tribes of Israel, and Joseph will have two portions. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You will inherit it and receive equal shares.* I swore to give this land to your forefathers, and now it is assigned* to you as an inheritance. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>“This is the boundary of the land on the northern side: It goes from the Great Sea by the way to Hethʹlon toward Zeʹdad, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Haʹmath, Be·roʹthah, and Sibʹra·im, which is between the territory of Damascus and the territory of Haʹmath, to Haʹzer-hatʹti·con, which is by the boundary of Ha·u·ranʹ. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So the boundary will run from the sea to Haʹzar-eʹnon, along the boundary of Damascus to the north, and the boundary of Haʹmath. This is the northern border. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>“The eastern side runs between Ha·u·ranʹ and Damascus and along the Jordan between Gilʹe·ad and the land of Israel. You should measure from the boundary to the eastern sea.* This is the eastern border. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“The southern border* will be from Taʹmar to the waters of Merʹi·bath-kaʹdesh, then to the Wadi* and to the Great Sea. This is the southern border.* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>“On the western side is the Great Sea, from the boundary up to a point opposite Leʹbo-haʹmath.* This is the western border.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>“You are to apportion this land among yourselves, among the 12 tribes of Israel. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>You should distribute it for inheritance among yourselves and to the foreigners residing with you who have had children while living among you; and they will be like native-born Israelites to you. They will receive an inheritance among the tribes of Israel along with you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>You should give the foreign resident an inheritance in the territory of the tribe where he has taken up residence,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. </p><p><strong>48 </strong>“These are the names of the tribes, starting from the northern extremity: Dan’s portion runs along the way of Hethʹlon to Leʹbo-haʹmath* to Haʹzar-eʹnan, along the boundary of Damascus northward, beside Haʹmath; and it extends from the eastern to the western border. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Ashʹer’s portion is on the boundary of Dan, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Naphʹta·li’s portion is on the boundary of Ashʹer, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Ma·nasʹseh’s portion is on the boundary of Naphʹta·li, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Eʹphra·im’s portion is on the boundary of Ma·nasʹseh, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Reuʹben’s portion is on the boundary of Eʹphra·im, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Judah’s portion is on the boundary of Reuʹben, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>On the boundary of Judah, from the eastern border to the western border, the contribution that you are to set apart should be 25,000 cubits* wide and correspond to the length of the other tribal portions from the eastern border to the western border. The sanctuary will be in the middle of it. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“The contribution that you are to set apart to Jehovah will be 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 wide. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>This will be the holy contribution for the priests. It will be 25,000 cubits on the north side, 10,000 on the west, 10,000 on the east, and 25,000 on the south. The sanctuary of Jehovah will be in the middle of it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>It will be for the sanctified priests from the sons of Zaʹdok, those who took care of their responsibilities toward me and did not go astray when the Israelites and the Levites went astray. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They will have a portion of the contribution of the land set apart as something most holy, on the boundary of the Levites. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“Right next to the territory of the priests, the Levites will have a portion 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 wide. (The whole length will be 25,000 long and 10,000 wide.) <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>They should not sell, exchange, or transfer any of this choicest portion of the land, for it is something holy to Jehovah. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>“The remaining area that is 5,000 cubits wide alongside the 25,000 cubit border will be for common use of the city, for housing and pasture ground. The city will be in the middle of it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>These are the city’s measurements: The northern border is 4,500 cubits, the southern border is 4,500, the eastern border is 4,500, and the western border is 4,500. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The pasture ground of the city will be 250 cubits to the north, 250 to the south, 250 to the east, and 250 to the west. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>“The length of the remaining portion will correspond to the holy contribution, 10,000 cubits to the east and 10,000 to the west. It will correspond to the holy contribution, and its produce will provide food for those serving the city. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Those who are serving the city from all the tribes of Israel will cultivate it. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>“The whole contribution is 25,000 cubits square. You should set it aside as the holy contribution along with the possession of the city. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>“What remains on both sides of the holy contribution and of the possession of the city will belong to the chieftain. It will be alongside the 25,000 cubit borders that are east and west of the contribution. It will correspond to those adjoining portions, and it will be for the chieftain. The holy contribution and the sanctuary of the temple will be in the middle of it. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>“The possession of the Levites and the possession of the city will be between what belongs to the chieftain. The chieftain’s territory will be between the boundary of Judah and the boundary of Benjamin. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“As for the remaining tribes, Benjamin’s portion is from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Simʹe·on’s portion is by the boundary of Benjamin, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Isʹsa·char’s portion is by the boundary of Simʹe·on, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Zebʹu·lun’s portion is by the boundary of Isʹsa·char, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Gad’s portion is by the boundary of Zebʹu·lun, from the eastern border to the western border. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The southern border by the boundary of Gad will run from Taʹmar to the waters of Merʹi·bath-kaʹdesh, to the Wadi* and on to the Great Sea.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>“This is the land that you should distribute as an inheritance to the tribes of Israel, and these will be their portions,” declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>“These will be the exits of the city: The northern side will measure 4,500 cubits. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“The gates of the city will be named according to the tribes of Israel. Of the three gates on the north, there is one gate for Reuʹben, one gate for Judah, and one gate for Leʹvi. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>“The eastern side will be 4,500 cubits long, and there are three gates: one gate for Joseph, one gate for Benjamin, and one gate for Dan. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>“The southern side will measure 4,500 cubits, with three gates: one gate for Simʹe·on, one gate for Isʹsa·char, and one gate for Zebʹu·lun. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>“The western side will be 4,500 cubits long, with three gates: one gate for Gad, one gate for Ashʹer, and one gate for Naphʹta·li. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>“The perimeter will be 18,000 cubits. And the name of the city from that day on will be Jehovah Is There.”</p><p></p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “set your heart.”</p><p>Lit., “house.” Rendered this way in chapters 40-48 when “house” refers to the temple complex or the actual temple building.</p><p>Lit., “a measuring reed of six cubits, a cubit and a handbreadth.” This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Possibly referring to the top of the wall of the guard chamber.</p><p>Or “beveled (splayed) windows.”</p><p>Or “I saw chambers.”</p><p>Lit., “width.”</p><p>Or possibly, “12.”</p><p>Lit., “the temple.” In chapters 41 and 42, this expression refers to the outer sanctuary (Holy) or to the entire sanctuary (the temple including the Holy and the Most Holy).</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “sides.”</p><p>That is, into the inner sanctuary, or Most Holy.</p><p>Lit., “The width of the entrance was.”</p><p>Apparently referring to circular staircases.</p><p>Apparently a narrow walkway around the temple.</p><p>Or “the chambers.”</p><p>That is, the building west of the sanctuary.</p><p>Or “maned young lion.”</p><p>Lit., “The doorpost.” This apparently refers to the entrance into the Holy.</p><p>Apparently referring to the Most Holy.</p><p>Lit., “length.”</p><p>Or “canopy.”</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Or “the chambers.”</p><p>According to the Greek <em>Septuagint, </em>“100 cubits long.” The Hebrew text reads: “A way of one cubit.” See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “in the width of.”</p><p>Lit., “inner house.”</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>Or possibly, “he.”</p><p>Lit., “house.”</p><p>Lit., “measure the pattern.”</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>That is, the span of the hand, about 22.2 cm (8.75 in.). See App. B14.</p><p>Or “perfect.”</p><p>That is, those of the people.</p><p>Lit., “set your heart.”</p><p>The Hebrew term may be related to a word for “dung” and is used as an expression of contempt.</p><p>Or “the holy chambers.”</p><p>Lit., “sanctify.”</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Or “Within all its boundaries.”</p><p>Lit., “500 by 500.”</p><p>Or “20 chambers.”</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>Or “mina.” See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>See App. B14.</p><p>Or “holy chambers.”</p><p>Lit., “sanctify.”</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Or “The four of them and their corner structures were the same size.”</p><p>Or “rows.”</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Or “the desert plain.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Lit., “the two streams.”</p><p>That is, the Mediterranean.</p><p>Lit., “inherit it, each like his brother.”</p><p>Lit., “falls.”</p><p>That is, the Dead Sea.</p><p>Lit., “the south side southward.”</p><p>That is, the Wadi of Egypt.</p><p>Lit., “the south side southward.”</p><p>Or “the entrance of Hamath.”</p><p>Or “the entrance of Hamath.”</p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>That is, the Wadi of Egypt.</p><p>That is, the Mediterranean.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014250.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***lr pp. 167-171 How Jesus Was Protected***</strong></a><br /><strong>CHAPTER 32</strong></p><p><strong>How Jesus Was Protected</strong></p><p>JEHOVAH sometimes does things in a wonderful way to protect those who are young and who are unable to protect themselves. If you go walking in the country, you may see one way that Jehovah does this. But at first you may not really understand what is happening.</p><p>You see a bird land on the ground near you. It seems to be hurt. It drags one of its wings and moves away when you try to approach it. As you follow the bird, it keeps just ahead of you. Then, suddenly, the bird flies away. Its wing was not hurt at all! Do you know what the bird was doing?—</p><p>Well, close to where the bird landed near you, its babies were hidden in the bushes. The mother bird was afraid that you might find them and hurt them. So she pretended to be hurt and led you away. Do you know who can protect us as a mother bird does her babies?— In the Bible, Jehovah is compared to a bird called an eagle, which helps its little ones.<wbr />—Deuteronomy 32:11, 12.</p><p>The most precious child of Jehovah is his dear Son, Jesus. When Jesus was in heaven, he was a powerful spirit person like his Father. He could take care of himself. But when Jesus was born as a baby on earth, he was helpless. He needed protection.</p><p>To fulfill God’s will for him on earth, Jesus had to grow up and become a perfect, full-grown man. Satan, however, tried to kill Jesus before that could happen. The attempts to kill Jesus when he was a child and the ways Jehovah protected him make an exciting story. Would you like to hear it?—</p><p>A short time after Jesus is born, Satan causes what appears to be a star to shine in the sky in the East. Men called astrologers, who study the stars, follow the star hundreds of miles to Jerusalem. There they ask where the one to be king of the Jews is to be born. When men who know what the Bible says about this are asked, they answer: “In Bethlehem.”<wbr />—Matthew 2:1-6.</p><p>After Herod, the bad king in Jerusalem, hears about this new king who has recently been born in the nearby town of Bethlehem, he tells the astrologers: ‘Search and find the child, and then come back and tell me.’ Do you know why Herod wants to know where to find Jesus?— It is because Herod is jealous and wants to kill him!</p><p>How does God protect his Son?— Well, when the astrologers find Jesus, they give him gifts. Later God gives the astrologers a warning in a dream not to return to Herod. So they go home another way without returning to Jerusalem. When Herod finds out that the astrologers have left, he is very angry. In an effort to kill Jesus, Herod has all the boys in Bethlehem under two years of age killed! But by then, Jesus is gone.</p><p>Do you know how Jesus escapes?— After the astrologers leave to go home, Jehovah gives a warning to Mary’s husband, Joseph, to get up and run far away to Egypt. There Jesus is safe from bad Herod. Years later, when Mary and Joseph return from Egypt with Jesus, God gives another warning to Joseph. He tells him in a dream to move to Nazareth, where Jesus will be safe.<wbr />—Matthew 2:7-23.</p><p>Do you see how Jehovah protected his Son?— Who would you say is like the little birds hidden by their mother in the bushes or like Jesus when he was a small child? Aren’t you like them?— There are those who want to hurt you too. Do you know who?—</p><p>The Bible says that Satan is like a roaring lion who wants to eat us. And just as lions often pick on small animals, Satan and his demons often pick on children. (1 Peter 5:8) But Jehovah is stronger than Satan. Jehovah can protect his children or undo anything bad that Satan does to them.</p><p>Do you remember from Chapter 10 of this book what the Devil and his demons try to get us to do?— Yes, they try to get us to have the kind of sex relations that God says is wrong. But who only should have sex relations?— Yes, two grown people of the opposite sex who are married to each other.</p><p>However, sad to say, some grown-ups like to have sex with children. When they do, boys and girls may begin to do bad things that they have learned from these grown-ups. They also begin to use their sex organs in a wrong way. That is what happened a long time ago in the city of Sodom. The Bible says that people there, <em>“from boy </em>to old man,” tried to have sex with men who had come to visit Lot.<wbr />—Genesis 19:4, 5.</p><p>So just as Jesus needed protection, you also need to be protected from grown-ups<wbr />—and even from other children—<wbr />who may try to have sex with you. Usually, these people will pretend to be your friends. They may even offer you something if you will promise not to tell others about what they want to do with you. But these people are selfish, like Satan and his demons, and they only want to get pleasure for themselves. And they try to get this pleasure by having sex with children. <em>This is very wrong!</em></p><p>Do you know what they may do to get pleasure for themselves?— Well, they may try to rub your sex organs. Or they will even rub their sex organs against yours. But you should never let anybody play with your penis or vulva. Not even your own brother or sister or your mother or father. <em>These parts of your body are private.</em></p><p>How can you protect your body from people who do bad things like this?— First of all, do not let anybody play with your sex organs. If someone tries to do this, say firmly in a loud voice: <em>“Stop that! I’m going to tell on you!” </em>And if that person says that what happened is your fault, don’t believe that. It is not true. Just go and tell on him no matter who it is! You should do so even if he says that what you are doing together is a secret just between you and him. Even if that person promises you nice presents or makes scary threats, you should get away from him and tell on him anyway.</p><p>You do not have to be afraid, but you do need to be careful. When your parents warn you about people or places that could be a danger to you, you need to listen to them. If you do, you take away a bad person’s chance to hurt you.</p><p>Read about protecting yourself from wrong sex acts, at Genesis 39:7-12; Proverbs 4:14-16; 14:15, 16; 1 Corinthians 6:18; and 2 Peter 2:14.</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 167]</strong></p><p>How is this mother bird protecting her little ones?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 168]</strong></p><p>After the astrologers visit Jesus, what warning does God give them that saves Jesus?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 169]</strong></p><p>How is young Jesus saved again?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 171]</strong></p><p>What should you say and do if someone tries to touch you in a wrong way?</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014250.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***g 10/07 p. 3 A Danger That Concerns Every Parent***</strong></a><br /><strong>A Danger That Concerns Every Parent</strong></p><p>HEATHER and Scott are a vivacious, happy couple, the parents of a bright, healthy three-year-old boy. They take good care of their son. In today’s world, that is no easy job. It involves a wide array of worries and responsibilities. There are so many things that children need to be taught! Heather and Scott feel strongly about one responsibility in particular: They want to protect their child from the dangers of sexual abuse. Why?</p><p>“My father was a cold, angry drunk,” Heather says. “He beat me terribly, and he molested me and my sisters.” It is widely agreed that such abuse can inflict deep emotional scars. No wonder Heather is determined to protect her son! Scott feels the same about protecting him.</p><p>Many parents are concerned about child abuse. Perhaps you are as well. Unlike Scott and Heather, you may not have come face-to-face with abuse and its effects, but you have no doubt heard shocking reports about the prevalence of this disgusting practice. Around the world good parents are horrified to learn what is happening to children in their area.</p><p>Not surprisingly, one researcher in the field of sexual abuse called the rates of child abuse “one of the most discouraging discoveries of our era.” That is certainly sad news, but are such developments surprising? Not to students of the Bible. God’s Word explains that we are living in a troubled period of time called “the last days,” a time marked by a prevalence of “fierce” behavior, when people would be “lovers of themselves” and would have “no natural affection.”<wbr />—2 Timothy 3:1-5.</p><p>Sexual abuse is a daunting issue. Indeed, some parents feel overwhelmed when they contemplate the sheer wickedness of the people who seek out children to abuse them sexually. However, is this problem too much for parents to handle? Or are there some practical steps that parents can take to keep their children safe? The following articles will address these questions.</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p>Names in this series of articles have been changed.</p><p>Sexual abuse of a child occurs when an adult uses a child to gratify his or her own sexual desires. It often involves what the Bible calls fornication, or <em>por·neiʹa, </em>which could include fondling of genitalia, sexual intercourse, and oral or anal sex. Some abusive acts<wbr />—such as the fondling of breasts, explicitly immoral proposals, showing pornography to a child, voyeurism, and indecent exposure—<wbr />may amount to what the Bible condemns as “loose conduct” or “uncleanness . . . with greediness.”<wbr />—Galatians 5:19-21; Ephesians 4:19.</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014250.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***g 10/07 pp. 4-8 How to Protect Your Children***</strong></a><br /><strong>How to Protect Your Children</strong></p><p>FEW of us want to dwell on the subject of sexual abuse of children. Parents shudder at the very thought of it! Such abuse, however, is a frightening and unpleasant reality in today’s world, and its effects on children can be devastating. Is the matter worth considering? Well, what would you be willing to give for the sake of your child’s safety? Learning about the unpleasant realities of abuse is surely a small price to pay. Such knowledge can really make a difference.</p><p>Do not let the plague of abuse rob you of your courage. At the very least, you have power that your child does not have<wbr />—strengths that it will take years, even decades, for your child to gain. The passing years have brought you a fund of knowledge, experience, and wisdom. The key is to enhance those strengths and put them to use in protecting your child. We will discuss three basic steps that every parent can take. They are as follows: (1) Become your child’s first line of defense against abuse, (2) give your child some needed background education, and (3) equip your child with some basic protective tools.</p><p><strong>Are You the First Line of Defense?</strong></p><p>The primary responsibility for protecting children against abuse belongs to parents, not to children. So educating parents comes before educating children. If you are a parent, there are a few things you need to know about child abuse. You need to know who abuse children and how they go about it. Parents often think of molesters as strangers who lurk in the shadows, seeking ways to kidnap and rape children. Such monsters certainly do exist. The news media bring them to our attention very often. However, they are relatively rare. In about 90 percent of the cases of sexual abuse of a child, the perpetrator is someone the child already knows and trusts.</p><p>Naturally, you do not want to believe that an affable neighbor, teacher, health-care worker, coach, or relative could lust after your child. In truth, most people are not like that. There is no need to become suspicious of everybody around you. Still, you can protect your child by learning how the typical abuser operates.<wbr />—See the box on page 6.</p><p>Knowing such tactics can make you, the parent, better prepared to act as the first line of defense. For instance, if someone who appears more interested in children than in adults singles out your child for special attention and gifts or offers free babysitting or private excursions with your child, what will you do? Decide that the person must be a molester? No. <em>Do not be quick to jump to conclusions. </em>Such behavior may be quite innocent. Nonetheless, it can put you on the alert. The Bible says: “Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word, but the shrewd one considers his steps.”<wbr />—Proverbs 14:15.</p><p>Remember, any offer that sounds too good to be true may be just that. Carefully screen anyone who volunteers to spend time alone with your child. Let such an individual know that you are likely to check on your child at any time. Melissa and Brad, young parents of three boys, are cautious about leaving a child alone with an adult. When one son had music lessons at home, Melissa told the instructor: “I’ll be in and out of the room while you’re here.” Such vigilance may sound extreme, but these parents would rather be safe than sorry.</p><p>Be actively involved in your child’s activities, friendships, and schoolwork. Learn all the details about any planned excursion. One mental-health professional who spent 33 years working with cases of sexual abuse notes that he has seen countless cases that could have been prevented by simple vigilance on the parents’ part. He quotes one convicted molester as saying: “Parents literally give us their children. . . . They sure made it easy for me.” Remember, most molesters prefer easy targets. Parents who are actively involved in their children’s lives make their children difficult targets.</p><p>Another way to act as your child’s first line of defense is to be a good listener. Children will rarely disclose abuse directly; they are too ashamed and worried about the reaction. So listen carefully, even for subtle clues. If your child says something that concerns you, calmly use questions to draw him out. If he says that he does not want a certain babysitter to come back, ask why. If he says that an adult plays funny games with him, ask him: “What kind of game? What does he do?” If he complains that someone tickled him, ask him, “Where did he tickle you?” Do not be quick to dismiss a child’s answers. Abusers tell a child that no one will believe him; all too often, that is true. And if a child has been abused, being believed and supported by a parent is a big step toward recovery.</p><p><strong>Give Your Child Background Education</strong></p><p>One reference work on the subject of child abuse quotes a convicted molester as saying: “Give me a kid who knows nothing about sex, and you’ve given me my next victim.” Those chilling words are a useful reminder to parents. Children who are ignorant about sex are much easier for molesters to fool. The Bible says that knowledge and wisdom can deliver us “from the man speaking perverse things.” (Proverbs 2:10-12) Is that not what you want for your child? Then, as your second basic step in protecting him, do not hold back from teaching him about this important subject.</p><p>How, though, do you go about it? More than a few parents find the subject of sex a bit awkward to discuss with children. Your child may find the subject even more awkward, and he is not likely to bring it up with you. So take the initiative. Melissa says: “We started early, with naming the body parts. We used real words, not baby words, to show them that there is nothing funny or shameful about any part of their body.” Instruction about abuse follows naturally. Many parents simply tell their children that the parts of their body that a bathing suit covers are private and special.</p><p>Says Heather, mentioned in the preceding article: “Scott and I told our son that his penis is private, personal, and not a toy. It’s not for anyone to play with<wbr />—not for Mommy, not for Daddy, not even for a doctor. When we take him to the doctor, I explain that he’s only going to make sure everything is OK, and that’s why he may touch there.” Both parents take part in these little talks from time to time, and they assure the child that he can always come to them and tell them if anyone touches him in a way that’s wrong or makes him feel uncomfortable. Experts in child care and abuse prevention recommend that all parents have similar talks with their children.</p><p>Many have found the book <em>Learn From the Great Teacher </em>to be a real help in teaching this subject. Chapter 32, “How Jesus Was Protected,” has a direct yet comforting message for children on the dangers of abuse and the importance of staying safe. “The book has given us a perfect way to reinforce what we have told our children personally,” says Melissa.</p><p>In today’s world children need to know that there are some people who want to touch children or get children to touch them in ways that are wrong. These warnings need not fill children with fear or make them distrust all adults. “It’s just a safety message,” says Heather. “And it’s one message among many others, most of them having nothing to do with abuse. It hasn’t made my son fearful at all.”</p><p>Your child’s education should include a balanced view of obedience. Teaching a child to obey is an important and difficult lesson. (Colossians 3:20) However, such lessons can go too far. If a child is taught that he must <em>always </em>obey <em>any </em>adult, regardless of the circumstances, he is vulnerable to abuse. Molesters are quick to notice when children are overly compliant. Wise parents teach their children that obedience is relative. For Christians, that is not as complicated as it may sound. It simply means saying to them: “If anybody tells you to do something that Jehovah God says is wrong, you don’t have to do it. Even Mommy or Daddy should never tell you to do something that Jehovah says is wrong. And you can always tell either Mommy or Daddy if someone tries to get you to do something wrong.”</p><p>Finally, let your child know that no one should ask him to keep a secret from you. Tell him that if anyone asks him to keep any kind of secret from you, he should always come and let you know. No matter what he is told<wbr />—even if scary threats are made or he has done something wrong himself—<wbr />it is <em>always </em>OK to come to Mommy or Daddy and tell them all about it. Such instruction need not scare your child. You can reassure him that most people would never do such things<wbr />—touch him where they shouldn’t, ask him to disobey God, or ask him to keep a secret. Like a planned escape route in case of fire, these are just-in-case messages and will probably never be needed.</p><p><strong>Equip Your Child With Some Basic Protective Tools</strong></p><p>The third step we will discuss is to give your child some simple actions to take in case someone tries to take advantage of him when you are not there. One method that is often recommended is like a game. Parents ask “What if . . . ?” and the child answers. You might say, “What if we were at the store together and we got separated? How would you find me?” The child’s answer may not be exactly what you would hope for, but you can guide him along with further questions, such as “Can you think of anything you could do that would be safer?”</p><p>You can use similar questions to ask a child what the safest response would be if someone tried to touch him in a wrong way. If the child is easily alarmed by such questions, you might try telling a story about another child. For example: “A little girl is with a relative she likes, but then he tries to touch her where he shouldn’t. What do you think she should do to stay safe?”</p><p>What should you teach your child to do in situations like the one above? Notes one author: “A firm ‘No!’ or ‘Don’t do that!’ or ‘Leave me alone!’ does wonders to frighten the seductive offender into retreat and into rethinking his or her choice of victim.” Help your child act out brief scenarios so that he feels confident to refuse loudly, get away quickly, and report to you whatever has happened. A child who seems to understand the training thoroughly may easily forget it within a few weeks or months. So repeat this training regularly.</p><p>All the child’s direct caregivers, including the males<wbr />—whether father, stepfather, or other male relatives—<wbr />should be part of these discussions. Why? Because all involved in such teaching are, in effect, promising the child that they will never commit such acts of abuse. Sadly, much sexual abuse occurs right within the confines of the family. The following article will discuss how you can make your family a safe haven in an abusive world.</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p>Experts note that many abused children give nonverbal clues that something is wrong. For example, if a child suddenly regresses to behavior he had outgrown some time earlier, such as bed-wetting, clinginess, or fear of being alone, he may be sending a signal that something serious is upsetting him. Such symptoms should not be taken as definite proof of abuse. Calmly draw out your child to learn the cause of the distress so that you can offer comfort, reassurance, and protection.</p><p>For the sake of simplicity, both the abuser and the victim are referred to here as males. Regardless of gender, though, the same principles apply.</p><p>Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.</p><p><strong>[Blurb on page 5]</strong></p><p>Be your child’s first line of defense</p><p><strong>[Blurb on page 7]</strong></p><p>Give your child background education</p><p><strong>[Blurb on page 8]</strong></p><p>Equip your child with basic protective tools</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 5]</strong></p><p>Be involved in your child’s activities</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 7]</strong></p><p>Do not hold back from teaching your child about sex</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 8]</strong></p><p>Teach your child to be firm and resolute if he or she is ever faced with a molester</p><p><strong>[Box on page 4]</strong></p><p><strong>SEXUAL ABUSE<wbr />—A GLOBAL PROBLEM</strong></p><p>  In 2006 the secretary-general of the United Nations transmitted to the UN General Assembly a world report on violence against children that had been compiled by an independent expert for the UN. During a recent year, according to the report, an estimated 150 million girls and 73 million boys under 18 years of age experienced “forced sexual intercourse or other forms of sexual violence.” Those numbers are staggering, but the report notes: “This is certainly an underestimate.” A review of studies from 21 countries suggested that in some places as many as 36 percent of women and 29 percent of men had been subjected to some form of sexual victimization in childhood. The majority of the perpetrators were relatives!</p><p><strong>[Box on page 6]</strong></p><p><strong>A PATTERN OF SEDUCTION</strong></p><p>  An abuser is likely to be too clever to use force on his victims. Rather, he may prefer to seduce children gradually. He begins by selecting a target, often a child who seems vulnerable and trusting, thus relatively easy to control. Next, he singles out that child for special attention. He may also try to win the trust of the child’s parents. Molesters are often expert at pretending to be sincerely interested in the child and the family.</p><p>  In time, the molester will begin grooming the child for abuse. He gradually becomes more physical with the child through innocent-looking displays of affection, playful wrestling, and tickling. He may give generous gifts and begin to separate the child from friends, siblings, and parents, in order to spend time alone with the child. At some point he may ask the child to keep some minor secret from the parents<wbr />—perhaps a gift or plans for some future excursion. Such tactics set the stage for seduction. When the abuser has won the child’s trust and that of the parents, he is ready to make his move.</p><p>  Again, he is likely to be subtle about it rather than violent or forceful. He may exploit the child’s natural curiosity about sex, offering to act as a “teacher,” or he may suggest that they play a “special game” together that only they will know about. He may try exposing the child to pornography in order to make such behavior seem normal.</p><p>  If he succeeds in molesting the child, he is now eager to ensure that the child does not tell anyone about it. He may use a variety of tactics, including threats, blackmail, and blame, or perhaps a combination of these. For example, he may say: “It’s your fault. You didn’t tell me to stop.” He may add: “If you tell your parents, they’ll call the police and send me to jail forever.” Or he may say: “It’s our secret. If you tell, no one will believe you. If your parents ever do find out, I will hurt them.” There is no end to the devious and malicious tactics such individuals will try.</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014250.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***g 10/07 pp. 9-11 Make Your Family a Safe Haven***</strong></a><br /><strong>Make Your Family a Safe Haven</strong></p><p>“HAVING no natural affection.” With those sad words, the Bible describes many people of our time, a period called “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1, 3, 4) The epidemic of child abuse in the family furnishes vivid proof of the truth of that prophecy. In fact, the original Greek word <em>aʹstor·gos, </em>rendered in English “having no natural affection,” suggested a lack of the love that should exist among family members, especially between parents and children. And all too often that is the setting in which child abuse occurs.</p><p>Some researchers say that the most common perpetrator of sexual abuse is the male parent figure. Other male relatives also commonly molest. While most victims are girls, many boys are abused as well. Female perpetrators are not as rare as you might assume. Perhaps the most underreported form of abuse is sibling incest, where an older or more powerful child bullies or seduces a younger or weaker brother or sister into sexual acts. As a parent, you surely find all such acts repugnant.</p><p>How can you keep these problems from arising in your family? Clearly, every member of every family needs to learn and to value some principles that rule out abusive conduct. The best place to find that kind of guidance is in God’s Word, the Bible.</p><p><strong>God’s Word and Physical Relations</strong></p><p>To be safe, every family needs to embrace the Bible’s standard of morality. The Bible is not prudish when it comes to discussing sex. It is dignified, yet frank and to the point. It shows that God designed sexual intimacy to be a real blessing to husband and wife. (Proverbs 5:15-20) However, it condemns sexual conduct outside that arrangement. For instance, the Bible speaks openly against incest. In Leviticus chapter 18, a wide variety of incestuous relationships are forbidden. Note these words in particular: “You people must not come near, any man of you, to <em>any close fleshly relative of his </em>to lay bare nakedness [to have sexual intercourse]. I am Jehovah.”<wbr />—Leviticus 18:6.</p><p>Jehovah listed acts of incest among the “detestable things” punishable by death. (Leviticus 18:26, 29) Clearly, the Creator has very high standards on this matter. Today, many governments take a similar view, outlawing the sexual abuse of children within the family. Often, the law holds that a child who is subjected to sexual relations by an adult has been raped. Why use that strong word if physical force was not involved?</p><p>Many authorities have come to recognize what the Bible has said all along about children<wbr />—that they tend to be unable to reason in the way that adults do. For example, Proverbs 22:15 says: “Foolishness is tied up with the heart of a boy.” And the apostle Paul was inspired to write: “When I was a babe, I used to . . . think as a babe, to reason as a babe; but now that I have become a man, I have done away with the traits of a babe.”<wbr />—1 Corinthians 13:11.</p><p>A child cannot understand the full meaning of sexual acts, nor can a child imagine the consequences that will follow over the years. Hence, it is widely agreed that children cannot give any meaningful consent to engage in sexual relations. In other words, if an adult (or significantly older youth) has relations with a child, the older person cannot excuse the act by saying that the child did not object or that the child asked for it. The adult is guilty of rape. This is a crime, often punishable by a prison sentence. The responsibility for the rape belongs with the rapist, not the unwilling victim.</p><p>Sadly, though, most of such crimes go unpunished by authorities today. In Australia, for example, it has been estimated that only 10 percent of offenders are prosecuted, and few are convicted. Other lands have had a similar record. While governments may be able to do little to protect the Christian family, the application of Bible principles can do far more.</p><p>True Christians realize that the God who had those principles recorded in his Word has not changed. He sees every deed we carry out, even those that are hidden to most humans. The Bible says: “All things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting.”<wbr />—Hebrews 4:13.</p><p>God holds us accountable if we violate his commands and hurt others. On the other hand, he blesses us for adhering to his positive commands regarding family life. What are some of these?</p><p><strong>A Family United by Love</strong></p><p>“Love,” the Bible tells us, “is a perfect bond of union.” (Colossians 3:14) As described in the Bible, love is not simply a feeling. It is defined by the way it motivates<wbr />—by the conduct it prompts and the deeds it forbids. (1 Corinthians 13:4-8) In the family, showing love means treating each member with dignity, respect, and kindness. It means living in harmony with God’s view of each family member. God gives each one an honorable and important role.</p><p>As the family head, the father is to take the lead in showing love. He understands that a Christian father is not given license to be a tyrant, abusing his power over his wife or children. Rather, he looks to Christ as his example in headship. (Ephesians 5:23, 25) So he is tender and loving with his wife and patient and gentle with his children. He loyally protects them and gives his all to prevent anything from happening that might rob them of their peace, their innocence, or their sense of trust and safety.</p><p>Likewise, the wife and mother has a role of vital importance and dignity. The Bible uses the protective instincts of mothers in the animal kingdom to illustrate how protective Jehovah and Jesus can be. (Matthew 23:37) A human mother should likewise be staunchly protective of her children. Lovingly, she is quick to put their safety and well-being ahead of her own. The parents do not allow abuse of power, bullying, or intimidation to enter into their dealings with each other or with their children; nor do they allow their children to use such tactics on one another.</p><p>As each family member treats the others with respect and dignity, good communication thrives. Notes author William Prendergast: “All parents should have daily, constant, close communication with their children or adolescents.” He adds: “This appears to be the best solution to the problem of sexual abuse.” Indeed, the Bible recommends just such constant and loving communication. (Deuteronomy 6:6, 7) When that direction is applied, the home is a place where each member can freely and safely speak from the heart.</p><p>Granted, we live in a wicked world and not all abuse can be prevented. Even so, a safe home can make a world of difference. If some member of the family is hurt outside the home, he or she knows just where to run for comfort and sympathy. Such a home is truly a refuge, a safe haven in a troubled world. May God bless your efforts to make your family just like that!</p><p><strong>[Footnote]</strong></p><p>This ancient Greek word has been defined: “Hard-hearted towards kindred.” One Bible translation thus renders this verse: “They will . . . lack normal affection for their families.”</p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Picture on page 10]</strong></p><p><strong>TIPS FOR A SAFE HOME</strong></p><p><strong>Internet: </strong>If your children have access to the Internet, they need instructions on how to use it safely. There are countless pornographic sites as well as chat rooms and other social networks where pedophiles seek out and seduce children. It is wise to keep the computer in an open area where parents can more easily monitor its use. Without parental supervision children should never give out personal information or arrange to see anyone they have met over the Internet.<wbr />—Psalm 26:4.</p><p><strong>Alcoholic Beverages: </strong>In many cases of sexual abuse of a child, alcohol has played a role. Experience shows that adults who overindulge tend to lower their inhibitions; some give in to desires they might otherwise have suppressed. At any rate, this danger adds another reason to heed the Bible’s counsel to avoid drunkenness and overdrinking.<wbr />—Proverbs 20:1; 23:20, 31-33; 1 Peter 4:3.</p><p><strong>Privacy: </strong>One woman recalls: “After Mom died, my father was the only one in the house who had curtains on his windows or a door into his bedroom. He gave us no privacy<wbr />—even in the bathroom.” This man molested all his daughters. Every family member needs to understand the importance of privacy. As parents need privacy from their children at certain times, so they need to give children an appropriate measure of privacy as they mature. Wise parents treat others as they themselves want to be treated.<wbr />—Matthew 7:12.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
