<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 22 The Kingdom Carries Out God’s Will on Earth</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014264.xhtml#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ezek. 47:1-12)</strong> <span id="citation23"></span>Then he brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and there I saw water flowing eastward from under the threshold of the temple, for the front of the temple was facing east. The water was flowing down from under the right side of the temple, south of the altar. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He then led me out by way of the north gate and took me outside and around to the outer gate that is facing east, and I saw water trickling from the right side. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the man went out toward the east with a measuring line in his hand, he measured off 1,000 cubits* and had me pass through the water; the water was ankle deep. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then he measured off another 1,000 and had me pass through the water, and it was up to the knees. He measured off another 1,000 and had me pass through, and the water was up to the hips. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>When he measured off another 1,000, it was a torrent that I was unable to walk across, for the water was so deep that one had to swim, a torrent of water that could not be crossed on foot. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He asked me: “Have you seen this, son of man?” Then he had me walk and return to the bank of the stream. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When I returned, I saw that on the bank of the stream were very many trees on both sides. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then he said to me: “This water flows toward the eastern region and continues down through the Arʹa·bah* and enters the sea. When it enters the sea, the water there will be healed. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Swarms of living creatures* will be able to live wherever the waters* flow. There will be an abundance of fish, because this water will flow there. The seawater will be healed, and everything will live wherever the stream goes. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>“Fishermen will stand beside it from En-gedʹi clear to En-egʹla·im, where there will be a drying yard for dragnets. There will be an abundance of many kinds of fish, like the fish of the Great Sea.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>“It will have swampy places and marshy places, and these will not be healed. They will be abandoned to salt. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“All sorts of trees for food will grow on both banks of the stream. Their leaves will not wither; nor will their fruitage fail. Each month they will bear new fruit, because the water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruitage will serve as food and their leaves for healing.”</p><p></p><p>This refers to long cubits. See App. B14.</p><p>Or “the desert plain.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Lit., “the two streams.”</p><p>That is, the Mediterranean.</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
