<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text:  1 “Let Your Kingdom Come”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014240.xhtml#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:1-51)</strong> <span id="citation39"></span>Now as Jesus was departing from the temple, his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In response he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, by no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.” <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”* <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads you, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Many false prophets will arise and mislead many; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But the one who has endured* to the end will be saved. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>“Therefore, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken about by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place (let the reader use discernment), <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>and let the man in the field not return to pick up his outer garment. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Keep praying that your flight may not occur in wintertime nor on the Sabbath day; <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Look! I have forewarned you. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Therefore, if people say to you, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘Look! He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For just as the lightning comes out of the east and shines over to the west, so the presence* of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>“Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And he will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>“Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence* of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>Then two men will be in the field; one will be taken along and the other abandoned. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Two women will be grinding at the hand mill; one will be taken along and the other abandoned. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>“But know one thing: If the householder had known in what watch* the thief was coming, he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>On this account, you too prove yourselves ready, because the Son of man is coming at an hour that you do not think to be it. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>“Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>“But if ever that evil slave says in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’ <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>and he starts to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards, <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know, <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>and he will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his place with the hypocrites. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “who endures.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “at what time of night.”</p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014240.xhtml#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 25:1-46)</strong> <span id="citation40"></span>“Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’ <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’ <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave five talents* to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’ <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Well, then, you should have deposited my money* with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’ <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>“Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably; <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>naked* and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you visited me.’ <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked and clothe you? <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>In reply the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’ <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>“Then he will say to those on his left: ‘Go away from me, you who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>For I became hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat; and I was thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>I was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick and in prison, but you did not look after me.’ <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>Then they too will answer with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’ <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>Then he will answer them, saying: ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did not do it to one of these least ones, you did not do it to me.’ <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>These will depart into everlasting cutting-off,* but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p><p>A Greek talent equaled 20.4 kg (654 oz t). See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Or “not sufficiently dressed.”</p><p>That is, from life. Lit., “lopping off; pruning.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014240.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***bh pp. 86-95 Are We Living in “the Last Days”?***</strong></a><br /><strong>CHAPTER NINE</strong></p><p><strong>Are We Living in “the Last Days”?</strong></p><p>What events in our time were foretold in the Bible?</p><p>What does God’s Word say people would be like in “the last days”?</p><p>Regarding “the last days,” what good things does the Bible foretell?</p><p>HAVE you watched the news on television and wondered, ‘What is this world coming to?’ Tragic things happen so suddenly and unexpectedly that no human can predict what tomorrow will bring. (James 4:14) However, Jehovah knows what the future holds. (Isaiah 46:10) Long ago his Word, the Bible, foretold not only the bad things happening in our day but also the wonderful things that will occur in the near future.</p><p><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jesus Christ spoke about the Kingdom of God, which will bring an end to wickedness and make the earth a paradise. (Luke 4:43) People wanted to know when the Kingdom would come. In fact, Jesus’ disciples asked him: “What will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” (Matthew 24:3) In reply Jesus told them that only Jehovah God knew exactly when the end of this system of things would come. (Matthew 24:36) But Jesus did foretell things that would take place on earth just before the Kingdom would bring true peace and security to mankind. What he foretold is now taking place!</p><p><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Before we examine the evidence that we are living in “the conclusion of the system of things,” let us briefly consider a war that no human could possibly have observed. It took place in the invisible spirit realm, and its outcome affects us.</p><p><strong>A WAR IN HEAVEN</strong></p><p><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The preceding chapter in this book explained that Jesus Christ became King in heaven in the year 1914. <strong>(Read Daniel 7:13, 14.) </strong>Soon after he received Kingdom power, Jesus took action. “War broke out in heaven,” says the Bible. “Michael [another name for Jesus] and his angels battled with the dragon [Satan the Devil], and the dragon and its angels battled.” Satan and his wicked angels, the demons, lost that war and were cast out of heaven to the earth. God’s faithful spirit sons rejoiced that Satan and his demons were gone. Humans, however, would experience no such joy. Instead, the Bible foretold: “Woe for the earth . . . because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.”<wbr />—Revelation 12:7, 9, 12.</p><p><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Please notice what would result from the war in heaven. In his fury, Satan would bring woe, or trouble, upon those on earth. As you will see, we are now living in that time of woe. But it will be relatively brief<wbr />—only “a short period of time.” Even Satan realizes that. The Bible refers to this period as “the last days.” (2 Timothy 3:1) How glad we can be that God will soon do away with the Devil’s influence over the earth! Let us consider some of the things foretold in the Bible that are happening right now. These prove that we are living in the last days and that God’s Kingdom will soon bring everlasting blessings to those who love Jehovah. First, let us examine four features of the sign that Jesus said would mark the time in which we live.</p><p><strong>MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS OF THE LAST DAYS</strong></p><p><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong><em>“Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom.” </em>(Matthew 24:7) Millions of people have been killed in wars during the past century. One British historian wrote: “The 20th century was the most murderous in recorded history. . . . It was a century of almost unbroken war, with few and brief periods without organised armed conflict somewhere.” A report from the Worldwatch Institute states: “Three times as many people fell victim to war in [the 20th] century as in all the wars from the first century AD to 1899.” More than 100 million people have died as a result of wars since 1914. Even if we know the sorrow of losing <em>one </em>loved one in warfare, we can only imagine such misery and pain multiplied <em>millions </em>of times over.</p><p><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong><em>“There will be food shortages.” </em>(Matthew 24:7) Researchers say that food production has increased greatly during the past 30 years. Nevertheless, food shortages continue because many people do not have enough money to buy food or land on which to raise crops. In developing countries, well over a billion people have to live on an income of a dollar or less a day. The majority of these suffer from chronic hunger. The World Health Organization estimates that malnutrition plays a major role in the deaths of more than five million children each year.</p><p><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong><em>“There will be great earthquakes.” </em>(Luke 21:11) According to the U.S. Geological Survey, an average of 19 major earthquakes are expected per year. These are powerful enough to damage buildings and crack the ground. And on an average, earthquakes strong enough to cause total destruction of buildings have occurred yearly. Available records show that earthquakes have claimed over two million lives since 1900. One source states: “Improvements in technology have only slightly reduced the death toll.”</p><p><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong><em>“There will be . . . pestilences.” </em>(Luke 21:11) Despite medical advances, old and new diseases plague mankind. One report says that 20 well-known diseases<wbr />—including tuberculosis, malaria, and cholera—<wbr />have become more common in recent decades, and some types of disease are increasingly difficult to cure by means of drugs. In fact, at least 30 new diseases have appeared. Some of them have no known cure and are fatal.</p><p><strong>PEOPLE OF THE LAST DAYS</strong></p><p><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Aside from identifying certain world developments, the Bible foretold that the last days would be marked by a change in human society. The apostle Paul described what people in general would be like. We are told: “In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.” <strong>(Read 2 Timothy 3:1-5.) </strong>Paul said that people would be</p><p>▪ <em>lovers of themselves</em></p><p>▪ <em>lovers of money</em></p><p>▪ <em>disobedient to parents</em></p><p>▪ <em>disloyal</em></p><p>▪ <em>having no natural affection</em></p><p>▪ <em>without self-control</em></p><p>▪ <em>fierce</em></p><p>▪ <em>lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God</em></p><p>▪ <em>having an appearance of godliness but proving false to its power</em></p><p><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Have people become like that in your community? No doubt they have. There are people everywhere who have bad traits. This shows that God will soon act, for the Bible says: “When the wicked sprout like weeds and all the wrongdoers flourish, it is that they may be annihilated forever.”<wbr />—Psalm 92:7.</p><p><strong>POSITIVE DEVELOPMENTS!</strong></p><p><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The last days are indeed filled with woe, just as the Bible foretold. In this troubled world, however, there are positive developments among the worshippers of Jehovah.</p><p><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong><em>“The true knowledge will become abundant,” </em>the Bible book of Daniel foretold. When would that happen? During “the time of the end.” (Daniel 12:4) Especially since 1914, Jehovah has helped those who truly desire to serve him to grow in understanding of the Bible. They have grown in appreciation of precious truths about God’s name and purpose, the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ, the condition of the dead, and the resurrection. Moreover, worshippers of Jehovah have learned how to live their lives in a way that benefits them and brings praise to God. They have also gained a clearer understanding of the role of God’s Kingdom and how it will set matters straight on the earth. What do they do with this knowledge? That question brings us to yet another prophecy that is being fulfilled in these last days.</p><p><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong><em>“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth,” </em>said Jesus Christ in his prophecy about “the conclusion of the system of things.” <strong>(Read Matthew 24:3, 14.) </strong>Throughout the earth, the good news of the Kingdom<wbr />—what the Kingdom is, what it will do, and how we can receive its blessings—<wbr />is being preached in over 230 lands and in hundreds of languages. Millions of Jehovah’s Witnesses zealously preach the Kingdom good news. They come from “all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues.” (Revelation 7:9) The Witnesses conduct free home Bible studies with millions of people who want to know what the Bible really teaches. What an impressive fulfillment of prophecy, especially since Jesus foretold that true Christians would be “hated by all people”!<wbr />—Luke 21:17.</p><p><strong>WHAT WILL YOU DO?</strong></p><p><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Since so many Bible prophecies are being fulfilled today, do you not agree that we are living in the last days? After the good news is preached to Jehovah’s satisfaction, “the end” is certain to come. (Matthew 24:14) “The end” means the time when God will get rid of wickedness on earth. To destroy all who willfully oppose Him, Jehovah will use Jesus and powerful angels. (2 Thessalonians 1:6-9) Satan and his demons will no longer mislead the nations. After that, God’s Kingdom will shower blessings on all who submit to its righteous rulership.<wbr />—Revelation 20:1-3; 21:3-5.</p><p><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Since the end of Satan’s system is near, we need to ask ourselves, ‘What should I be doing?’ It is wise to continue to learn more about Jehovah and his requirements for us. (John 17:3) Be a serious student of the Bible. Make it your habit to associate regularly with others who seek to do Jehovah’s will. <strong>(Read Hebrews 10:24, 25.) </strong>Come to know Jehovah God through a study of his Word, and make necessary changes in your life so that you may enjoy God’s favor.<wbr />—James 4:8.</p><p><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jesus foretold that most people would ignore the evidence that we are living in the last days. The destruction of the wicked will come suddenly and unexpectedly. Like a thief in the night, it will catch most people by surprise. <strong>(Read 1 Thessalonians 5:2.) </strong>Jesus warned: “As the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be. For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be.”<wbr />—Matthew 24:37-39.</p><p><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Hence, Jesus told his listeners: “Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you as a snare. For it will come upon all those dwelling on the face of the whole earth. Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that you may succeed in escaping all these things that must occur and in standing [with approval] before the Son of man.” (Luke 21:34-36) It is wise to take Jesus’ words to heart. Why? Because those having the approval of Jehovah God and “the Son of man,” Jesus Christ, have the prospect of surviving the end of Satan’s system of things and of living forever in the marvelous new world that is so close at hand!<wbr />—John 3:16; 2 Peter 3:13.</p><p><strong>[Footnote]</strong></p><p>For information showing that Michael is another name for Jesus Christ, see the Appendix article “Who Is Michael the Archangel?”</p><p><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES</strong></p><p>▪ The last days are marked by wars, food shortages, earthquakes, and pestilences.<wbr />—Matthew 24:7; Luke 21:11.</p><p>▪ In the last days, many love themselves, money, and pleasures but do not love God.<wbr />—2 Timothy 3:1-5.</p><p>▪ During these last days, the good news of the Kingdom is being preached worldwide.<wbr />—Matthew 24:14.</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p> 1. Where can we learn about the future?</p><p>2, 3. What question did the disciples ask Jesus, and how did he reply?</p><p>4, 5. (a) What took place in heaven soon after Jesus was enthroned as King? (b) According to Revelation 12:12, what was to be the result of the war in heaven?</p><p>6, 7. How are Jesus’ words about wars and food shortages being fulfilled today?</p><p>8, 9. What shows that Jesus’ prophecies about earthquakes and pestilences have come true?</p><p>10. What traits foretold at 2 Timothy 3:1-5 do you see in people today?</p><p>11. How does Psalm 92:7 describe what will happen to the wicked ones?</p><p>12, 13. How has “true knowledge” become abundant in this “time of the end”?</p><p>14. How widespread is the preaching of the Kingdom good news today, and who are preaching it?</p><p>15. (a) Do you believe that we are living in the last days, and why? (b) What will “the end” mean for those who oppose Jehovah and for those who submit to the rulership of God’s Kingdom?</p><p>16. What would it be wise for you to do?</p><p>17. Why will the destruction of the wicked catch most people by surprise?</p><p>18. What warning by Jesus should we take to heart?</p><p><wbr /><strong>[Picture on pages 90, 91]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture on page 93]</strong></p><p>“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.”<wbr />—Matthew 24:14<wbr /><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
