<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 16 Meeting Together for Worship</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014255.xhtml#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Rev. 17:1-18)</strong></a> <span id="citation43"></span>One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me: “Come, I will show you the judgment on the great prostitute who sits on many waters, <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality,* and earth’s inhabitants were made drunk with the wine of her sexual immorality.”* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And he carried me away in the power of the spirit into a wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored wild beast that was full of blasphemous names and that had seven heads and ten horns. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and she was adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls, and she had in her hand a golden cup that was full of disgusting things and the unclean things of her sexual immorality.* <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>On her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, the mother of the prostitutes and of the disgusting things of the earth.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the holy ones and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. Well, on seeing her I was greatly amazed. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>So the angel said to me: “Why is it that you were amazed? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the wild beast that is carrying her and that has the seven heads and the ten horns: <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The wild beast that you saw was, but is not, and yet is about to ascend out of the abyss, and it is to go off into destruction. And the inhabitants of the earth—those whose names have not been written in the scroll of life from the founding of the world—will be amazed when they see how the wild beast was, but is not, and yet will be present. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“This calls for a mind* that has wisdom: The seven heads mean seven mountains, where the woman sits on top. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>And there are seven kings: Five have fallen, one is, and the other has not yet arrived; but when he does arrive, he must remain a short while. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And the wild beast that was but is not, it is also an eighth king, but it springs from the seven, and it goes off into destruction. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“The ten horns that you saw mean ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they do receive authority as kings for one hour with the wild beast. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>These have one thought, so they give their power and authority to the wild beast. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>These will battle with the Lamb, but because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, the Lamb will conquer them. Also, those with him who are called and chosen and faithful will do so.” <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He said to me: “The waters that you saw, where the prostitute is sitting, mean peoples and crowds and nations and tongues.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>And the ten horns that you saw and the wild beast, these will hate the prostitute and will make her devastated and naked, and they will eat up her flesh and completely burn her with fire. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For God put it into their hearts to carry out his thought, yes, to carry out their one thought by giving their kingdom to the wild beast, until the words of God will have been accomplished. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>And the woman whom you saw means the great city that has a kingdom over the kings of the earth.”</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Greek, <em>por·neiʹa. </em>See Glossary.</p><p>Greek, <em>por·neiʹa. </em>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “for intelligence.”</p><p>Or “languages.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014255.xhtml#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:1-49)</strong></a> <span id="citation44"></span>In the second year of his kingship, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had a number of dreams, and he* was so agitated that he could not sleep. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So the king gave the order to summon the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the sorcerers, and the Chal·deʹans* to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then the king said to them: “I have had a dream, and I am* agitated because I want to know what I dreamed.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The Chal·deʹans replied to the king in the Ar·a·maʹic language:* “O king, may you live on forever. Relate the dream to your servants, and we will tell the interpretation.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The king answered the Chal·deʹans: “This is my final word: If you do not make the dream known to me, along with its interpretation, you will be dismembered, and your houses will be turned into public latrines.* <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>But if you do tell the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts and a reward and great honor. So tell me the dream and its interpretation.” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They answered a second time: “Let the king relate the dream to his servants, and we will tell its interpretation.” <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The king replied: “I am well-aware that you are trying to gain time, for you realize what my final word is. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If you do not make the dream known to me, there is only one penalty for all of you. But you have agreed to tell me something false and deceitful until the situation changes. So tell me the dream, and I will know that you can explain its interpretation.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The Chal·deʹans answered the king: “There is not a man on earth* who is able to do what the king demands, for no great king or governor has asked such a thing of any magic-practicing priest or conjurer or Chal·deʹan. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>What the king is asking is difficult, and no one exists who could tell the king this except the gods, who do not dwell among mortals.”* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>At this the king flew into a violent rage and gave the order to destroy all the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>When the order was issued and the wise men were about to be killed, they also looked for Daniel and his companions to put them to death. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>At that time Daniel discreetly and cautiously spoke to Arʹi·och the chief of the king’s bodyguard, who had gone out to kill the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He asked Arʹi·och the officer of the king: “Why is there such a harsh order from the king?” Then Arʹi·och informed Daniel about the matter. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>So Daniel went in and asked the king to grant him time to tell the interpretation to the king. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Daniel then went to his house and informed his companions Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah of the matter. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He asked them to pray for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this secret, so that Daniel and his companions would not be destroyed along with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Then the secret was revealed to Daniel in a vision at night. So Daniel praised the God of heaven. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Daniel declared: “Let the name of God be praised for all eternity,* For wisdom and mightiness are his alone. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He changes times and seasons, Removes kings and sets up kings, Gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those with discernment. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>He reveals the deep things and the hidden things, He knows what is in the darkness, And with him the light dwells. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>To you, O God of my forefathers, I offer thanks and praise, Because you have given me wisdom and power. And now you have made known to me what we requested of you; You have made known to us the concern of the king.” <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Daniel then went in to Arʹi·och, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon, and he said to him: “Do not destroy any wise men of Babylon. Take me in before the king, and I will tell the interpretation to the king.” <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Arʹi·och quickly took Daniel in before the king and said to him: “I have found a man of the exiles of Judah who can make known the interpretation to the king.” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The king said to Daniel, whose name was Bel·te·shazʹzar: “Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw, and its interpretation?” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Daniel replied to the king: “None of the wise men, conjurers, magic-practicing priests, or astrologers are able to tell the king the secret that he is asking. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But there is a God in the heavens who is a Revealer of secrets, and he has made known to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar what is to happen in the final part of the days. This is your dream, and these are the visions of your head as you lay on your bed: <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>“As for you, O king, on your bed your thoughts turned to what is to take place in the future, and the Revealer of secrets has made known to you what is to happen. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>As for me, this secret was not revealed to me because I have greater wisdom than anyone living; rather, it was to make the interpretation known to the king so that you may know the thoughts in your heart. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“You, O king, were watching, and you saw an immense image.* That image, which was huge and extremely bright, was standing in front of you, and its appearance was terrifying. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The head of that image was of fine gold, its chest and its arms were of silver, its abdomen and its thighs were of copper, <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>its legs were of iron, and its feet were partly of iron and partly of clay.* <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>You looked on until a stone was cut out, not by hands, and it struck the image on its feet of iron and of clay and crushed them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>At that time the iron, the clay, the copper, the silver, and the gold were, all together, crushed and became like the chaff from the summer threshing floor, and the wind carried them away so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a large mountain, and it filled the whole earth. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“This is the dream, and we will now tell the king its interpretation. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>You, O king—the king of kings to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the might, the strength, and the glory, <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>and into whose hand he has given men wherever they may dwell, as well as the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens, and whom he has made ruler over all of them—you yourself are the head of gold. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>“But after you another kingdom will rise, inferior to you; then another kingdom, a third one, of copper, that will rule over the whole earth. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>“As for the fourth kingdom, it will be strong like iron. For just as iron crushes and pulverizes everything else, yes, like iron that shatters, it will crush and shatter all of these. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>“And just as you saw the feet and the toes to be partly of clay of a potter and partly of iron, the kingdom will be divided, but some of the hardness of iron will be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with soft clay. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Just as you saw iron mixed with soft clay, they will be mixed with the people;* but they will not stick together, one to the other, just as iron does not mix with clay. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever, <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>just as you saw that out of the mountain a stone was cut not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the copper, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The Grand God has made known to the king what will happen in the future. The dream is true, and its interpretation is trustworthy.” <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar fell down with his face to the ground before Daniel and paid homage to him. And he gave the order to offer a present and incense to him. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>The king said to Daniel: “Truly your God is a God of gods and a Lord of kings and a Revealer of secrets, because you were able to reveal this secret.” <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>The king then elevated Daniel and gave him many fine gifts, and he made him the ruler over all the province* of Babylon and the chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>And at Daniel’s request, the king appointed Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go over the administration of the province* of Babylon, but Daniel served in the king’s court.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “his spirit.”</p><p>That is, a group skilled in divination and astrology.</p><p>Lit., “my spirit is.”</p><p>Da 2:4b through 7:28 was originally written in Aramaic.</p><p>Or possibly, “garbage dumps; dunghills.”</p><p>Or “dry land.”</p><p>Lit., “with flesh.”</p><p>Or “from eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “statue.”</p><p>Or “baked (molded) clay.”</p><p>Or “the offspring of mankind,” that is, the common people.</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014255.xhtml#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Ex. 15:1-21)</strong></a> <span id="citation45"></span>At that time Moses and the Israelites sang this song to Jehovah: “Let me sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My strength and my might is Jah,* since he has become my salvation. This is my God, and I will praise him; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is a powerful warrior. Jehovah is his name.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Pharʹaoh’s chariots and his army He has cast into the sea, And his finest warriors have sunk into the Red Sea.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The surging waters covered them; down into the depths they sank like a stone.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Your right hand, O Jehovah, is great in power; Your right hand, O Jehovah, can shatter an enemy.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In your great majesty you can throw down those who rise up against you; You send out your burning anger, it eats them up like stubble.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>By a breath from your nostrils waters massed together; They stood still, holding back the floods; The surging waters congealed in the heart of the sea.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The enemy said: ‘I will pursue! I will overtake! I will divide spoil until I am* satisfied! I will draw my sword! My hand will subdue them!’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You blew with your breath, the sea covered them; They sank like lead in majestic waters. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Who among the gods is like you, O Jehovah? Who is like you, showing yourself mighty in holiness? The One to be feared with songs of praise, the One doing wonders. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You stretched out your right hand, and the earth swallowed them up. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>In your loyal love you have led the people whom you have redeemed; In your strength you will guide them to your holy place of dwelling. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Peoples must hear; they will shudder; Anguish* will seize the inhabitants of Phi·lisʹti·a. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>At that time the sheikhs* of Eʹdom will be terrified, And trembling will take hold of the mighty rulers* of Moʹab. All the inhabitants of Caʹnaan will be disheartened. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Fear and dread will fall upon them. Because of the greatness of your arm they will be as motionless as a stone Until your people pass by, O Jehovah, Until the people whom you produced pass by. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>You will bring them and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance, The established place that you have prepared for yourself to inhabit, O Jehovah, A sanctuary, O Jehovah, that your hands have established. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah will rule as king forever and ever. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When Pharʹaoh’s horses with his war chariots and his cavalrymen went into the sea, Then Jehovah brought back the waters of the sea upon them, But the people of Israel walked on dry ground through the midst of the sea.” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Then Mirʹi·am the prophetess, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women followed her with tambourines and with dances. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Mirʹi·am sang in response to the men: “Sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.”</p><p></p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “my soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “Birth pangs.”</p><p>A sheikh was a tribal chief.</p><p>Or “the despots.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014255.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***w99 7/15 pp. 12-14 Helping People to Draw Close to Jehovah***</strong></a><br /><strong>Building Work That Will Remain</strong></p><p><sup>15 </sup>While rejoicing in the increase, we sincerely want to see people continue to love Jehovah, listen to his voice, and stick to him. We are sad when we see some cool off and fall away. Can we do anything to prevent this? In another illustration, Paul shows how we can help others to develop faith. He writes: “No man can lay any other foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if anyone builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood materials, hay, stubble, each one’s work will become manifest, for the day will show it up, because it will be revealed by means of fire; and the fire itself will prove what sort of work each one’s is.”<wbr />—1 Corinthians 3:11-13.</p><p><sup>16 </sup>In Paul’s illustration of the field, growth depends on conscientious planting, regular watering, and God’s blessing. The apostle’s other illustration highlights the Christian minister’s responsibility for what becomes of his building work. Has he built on a sure foundation with quality materials? Paul warns: “Let each one keep watching how he is building.” (1 Corinthians 3:10) Having aroused a person’s interest by telling him or her about the hope of everlasting life in Paradise, do we focus our teaching on just the basics of Scriptural knowledge and then lay emphasis principally on what the person must do to get eternal life? Could our teaching consist solely of this: ‘If you want to live forever in Paradise, you must study, go to meetings, and share in the preaching work’? If so, we are not building the person’s faith on a solid foundation, and what we build may not resist the fire of trials or stand the test of time. Trying to draw people to Jehovah just by the hope of life in Paradise in exchange for a few years spent serving him is like building with “wood materials, hay, stubble.”</p><p><strong>Building Love for God and Christ</strong></p><p><sup>17 </sup>For faith to endure, it must be based on a personal relationship with Jehovah God through Jesus Christ. As imperfect humans, we can attain such a peaceful relationship with God only through his Son. (Romans 5:10) Remember that Jesus said: “No one comes to the Father except through me.” To help others build faith, “no man can lay any other foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” What does this involve?<wbr />—John 14:6; 1 Corinthians 3:11.</p><p><sup>18 </sup>Building on Christ as the foundation means teaching in such a way that the Bible student develops a deep love for Jesus through full knowledge of His role as Redeemer, Head of the congregation, loving High Priest, and reigning King. (Daniel 7:13, 14; Matthew 20:28; Colossians 1:18-20; Hebrews 4:14-16) It means making Jesus so real to them that he virtually dwells in their hearts. Our prayer for them should be like Paul’s petition in behalf of Christians in Ephesus. He wrote: “I bend my knees to the Father, . . . to the end that he may grant you . . . to have the Christ dwell through your faith in your hearts with love; that you may be rooted and established on the foundation.”<wbr />—Ephesians 3:14-17.</p><p><sup>19 </sup>If we build in such a manner that love for Christ develops in the hearts of our students, this will logically result in building love for Jehovah God. Jesus’ love, feeling, and compassion are a faithful reflection of Jehovah’s qualities. (Matthew 11:28-30; Mark 6:30-34; John 15:13, 14; Colossians 1:15; Hebrews 1:3) So as people get to know and love Jesus, they will come to know and love Jehovah. (1 John 4:14, 16, 19) We need to teach Bible students that Jehovah is behind all that Christ has done for mankind and that we therefore owe Him thanks, praise, and worship as the “God of our salvation.”<wbr />—Psalm 68:19, 20; Isaiah 12:2-5; John 3:16; 5:19.</p><p><sup>20 </sup>As God’s fellow workers, let us help people to draw close to him and to his Son, helping them to develop love and faith in their hearts. Jehovah will thus become real to them. (John 7:28) Through Christ, they will be able to establish an intimate relationship with God, and they will love him and stick to him. They will set no time limits on their loving service, exercising faith that Jehovah’s wonderful promises will be fulfilled in his due time. (Lamentations 3:24-26; Hebrews 11:6) While helping others to develop faith, hope, and love, however, we must build our own faith so that it is like a sturdy ship capable of weathering severe storms. This will be considered in the following article.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
