<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text:  3 Jehovah Reveals His Purpose</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014242.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***w95 10/15 pp. 23-28 What Future for the Sheep and the Goats?***</strong></a><br /><strong>What Future for the Sheep and the Goats</strong>?</p><p>“He will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.”<wbr />—MATTHEW 25:32.</p><p>JESUS CHRIST certainly was the greatest Teacher on earth. (John 7:46) One of his teaching methods was the use of parables, or illustrations. (Matthew 13:34, 35) These were simple yet powerful in conveying deep spiritual and prophetic truths.</p><p><sup>2 </sup>In the parable of the sheep and the goats, Jesus pointed to a time for him to act in a special capacity: “When the Son of man arrives in his glory, and . . .” (Matthew 25:31) This should interest us because it is the illustration with which Jesus concludes his reply to the question: “What will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” (Matthew 24:3) But what does this mean for us?</p><p><sup>3 </sup>Jesus foretold striking developments to come “immediately after” the outbreak of great tribulation, developments we await. He said that then “the sign of the Son of man” would appear. This will profoundly affect “all the tribes of the earth” who will “see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.” The Son of man will be accompanied by “his angels.” (Matthew 24:21, 29-31) What of the parable of the sheep and the goats? Modern Bibles put it in Mt chapter 25, but it is part of Jesus’ reply, giving further details about his coming in glory and focusing on his judging of “all the nations.”<wbr />—Matthew 25:32.</p><p><strong>Figures in the Parable</strong></p><p><sup>4 </sup>Jesus begins the parable by saying: “When the Son of man arrives.” You likely know who “the Son of man” is. Gospel writers often applied that expression to Jesus. Even Jesus himself did so, no doubt having in mind Daniel’s vision of “someone like a son of man” approaching the Ancient of Days to receive “rulership and dignity and kingdom.” (Daniel 7:13, 14; Matthew 26:63, 64; Mark 14:61, 62) While Jesus is the principal one in this parable, he is not alone. Earlier in this discourse, as quoted at Matthew 24:30, 31, he said that when the Son of man ‘comes with power and great glory,’ his angels will play a vital role. Similarly, the parable of the sheep and the goats shows angels with Jesus when he ‘sits down on his glorious throne’ to judge. (Compare Matthew 16:27.) But the Judge and his angels are in heaven, so are humans discussed in the parable?</p><p><sup>5 </sup>A glance at the parable reveals three groups that we need to identify. In addition to the sheep and the goats, the Son of man adds the third group whose identity is pivotal to identifying the sheep and the goats. Jesus calls this third group his spiritual brothers. (Matthew 25:40, 45) They must be true worshipers, for Jesus said: “Whoever does the will of my Father . . . , the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.” (Matthew 12:50; John 20:17) More to the point, Paul wrote of Christians who are part of “Abraham’s seed” and who are sons of God. He called these Jesus’ “brothers” and “partakers of the heavenly calling.”<wbr />—Hebrews 2:9–3:1; Galatians 3:26, 29.</p><p><sup>6 </sup>Why did Jesus mention <em>“the least” </em>of his brothers? Those words echo what the apostles heard him say earlier. When contrasting John the Baptist, who died before Jesus and therefore had an earthly hope, with those attaining to heavenly life, Jesus said: “There has not been raised up a greater than John the Baptist; but a person that is a lesser one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he is.” (Matthew 11:11) Some going to heaven may have been prominent in the congregation, like the apostles, and others less so, but they are all Jesus’ spiritual brothers. (Luke 16:10; 1 Corinthians 15:9; Ephesians 3:8; Hebrews 8:11) Thus, even if some seemed insignificant on earth, they were his brothers and should have been treated accordingly.</p><p><strong>Who Are the Sheep and the Goats?</strong></p><p><sup>7 </sup>We read concerning the judging of the sheep: “[Jesus] will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world. For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I got thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably; naked, and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you came to me.’ Then the <em>righteous ones </em>will answer him with the words, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty, and give you something to drink? When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked, and clothe you? When did we see you sick or in prison and go to you?’ And in reply the king will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, To the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’”<wbr />—Matthew 25:34-40.</p><p><sup>8 </sup>Obviously, the sheep judged worthy of being on Jesus’ right side of honor and favor represent a class of humans. (Ephesians 1:20; Hebrews 1:3) What did they do and when? Jesus says that they kindly, respectfully, and generously gave him food, drink, and clothing, aiding him when he was sick or in prison. When the sheep say that they had not done this to Jesus personally, he points out that they did support his spiritual brothers, the remnant of anointed Christians, so in that sense they did it to him.</p><p><sup>9 </sup>The parable does not apply during the Millennium, for the anointed will not then be humans suffering hunger, thirst, sickness, or imprisonment. Many of them, though, have experienced such during the conclusion of this system of things. Ever since Satan was cast down to earth, he has made the remnant a special object of his fury, bringing on them ridicule, torture, and death.<wbr />—Revelation 12:17.</p><p><sup>10 </sup>Is Jesus saying that everyone doing a small kindness to one of his brothers, such as offering a piece of bread or a glass of water, qualifies as one of these sheep? Granted, rendering such kindnesses may reflect human kindness, but really, it seems that much more is involved with the sheep of this parable. Jesus was hardly referring, for example, to atheists or clergymen who happen to do a kind act to one of his brothers. On the contrary, Jesus twice called the sheep “righteous ones.” (Matthew 25:37, 46) So the sheep must be ones who over a period of time have come to the aid of<wbr />—actively supporting—<wbr />Christ’s brothers and have exercised faith to the extent of receiving a righteous standing before God.</p><p><sup>11 </sup>Over the centuries, many such as Abraham have enjoyed a righteous standing. (James 2:21-23) Noah, Abraham, and other faithful ones count among the “other sheep” who will inherit life in Paradise under God’s Kingdom. In recent times millions more have taken up true worship as other sheep and have become “one flock” with the anointed. (John 10:16; Revelation 7:9) These with earthly hopes recognize Jesus’ brothers as ambassadors of the Kingdom and have therefore aided them<wbr />—literally and spiritually. Jesus counts as done to him what the other sheep do for his brothers on earth. Such ones who are alive when he comes to judge the nations will be judged as sheep.</p><p><sup>12 </sup>If the other sheep are now preaching the good news with the anointed and aiding them, why would they ask: “Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty, and give you something to drink?” (Matthew 25:37) There could be various reasons. This is a parable. By means of it, Jesus shows his deep concern for his spiritual brothers; he feels with them, suffers with them. Jesus had earlier said: “He that receives you receives me also, and he that receives me receives him also that sent me forth.” (Matthew 10:40) In this illustration, Jesus extends the principle, showing that what is done (good or bad) to his brothers reaches even into heaven; it is as if it is done to him in heaven. Also, Jesus here emphasizes Jehovah’s standard for judging, making it clear that God’s judgment, whether favorable or condemnatory, is valid and just. The goats cannot offer the excuse, ‘Well, if only we had seen you directly.’</p><p><sup>13 </sup>Once we appreciate when it is that the judgment shown in this parable is rendered, we get a clearer view of who the goats are. The fulfillment is when “the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and then <em>all the tribes of the earth </em>will beat themselves in lamentation, and they will see the Son of man coming . . . with power and great glory.” (Matthew 24:29, 30) Survivors of the tribulation on Babylon the Great who have treated the King’s brothers despitefully may now desperately address the Judge as “Lord,” hoping to save their lives.<wbr />—Matthew 7:22, 23; compare Revelation 6:15-17.</p><p><sup>14 </sup>However, Jesus’ judgment will not be based on desperate claims from former churchgoers, atheists, or others. (2 Thessalonians 1:8) Instead, the judge will review the heart condition and past actions of people toward even “one of these least ones [of his brothers].” Admittedly, the number of anointed Christians left on earth is declining. However, as long as the anointed, making up “the faithful and discreet slave,” continue to provide spiritual food and direction, prospective sheep have an opportunity to do good to the slave class, just as the ‘great crowd out of all nations and tribes and peoples’ have done.<wbr />—Revelation 7:9, 14.</p><p><sup>15 </sup>How have Christ’s brothers and the millions of other sheep united with them as one flock been treated? Many people may not personally have attacked Christ’s representatives, but neither have they treated his people lovingly. Preferring the wicked world, goatlike ones reject the Kingdom message, whether hearing it directly or indirectly. (1 John 2:15-17) Of course, in the final analysis, Jesus is the one who is appointed to render judgment. It is not for us to determine who are sheep and who are goats.<wbr />—Mark 2:8; Luke 5:22; John 2:24, 25; Romans 14:10-12; 1 Corinthians 4:5.</p><p><strong>What Future for Each Group?</strong></p><p><sup>16 </sup>Jesus gave his judgment of the sheep: “Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world.” What a warm invitation<wbr />—“Come”! To what? To everlasting life, as he expressed in summation: “The righteous [will enter] into everlasting life.”<wbr />—Matthew 25:34, 46.</p><p><sup>17 </sup>In the parable of the talents, Jesus showed what is required of those who will rule with him in heaven, but in this parable he shows what is expected of the Kingdom’s subjects. (Matthew 25:14-23) Pointedly, because of their undivided support of Jesus’ brothers, the sheep inherit a place in the earthly realm of his Kingdom. They will enjoy life on a paradise earth<wbr />—a prospect that God prepared for them “from the founding of the world” of redeemable humans.<wbr />—Luke 11:50, 51.</p><p><sup>18 </sup>What a contrast is the judgment executed on the goats! “Then he will say, in turn, to those on his left, ‘Be on your way from me, you who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. For I became hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat, and I got thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink. I was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick and in prison, but you did not look after me.’ Then they also will answer with the words, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’ Then he will answer them with the words, ‘Truly I say to you, To the extent that you did not do it to one of these least ones, you did not do it to me.’”<wbr />—Matthew 25:41-45.</p><p><sup>19 </sup>Bible students know that this cannot mean that immortal souls of goatlike ones will suffer in an eternal fire. No, for humans <em>are </em>souls; they do not <em>possess </em>immortal souls. (Genesis 2:7; Ecclesiastes 9:5, 10; Ezekiel 18:4) By sentencing the goats to “everlasting fire,” the Judge means destruction devoid of a future hope, which will also be the permanent end for the Devil and his demons. (Revelation 20:10, 14) Hence, Jehovah’s Judge sets out opposites. He tells the sheep, “Come”; the goats, “Be on your way from me.” The sheep will inherit “everlasting life.” The goats will receive “everlasting cutting-off.”<wbr />—Matthew 25:46.</p><p><strong>What Does It Mean for Us?</strong></p><p><sup>20 </sup>The four apostles who heard Jesus’ reply about the sign of his presence and the conclusion of the system had much to consider. They would need to keep awake and on the watch. (Matthew 24:42) They would also need to do the witnessing work mentioned at Mark 13:10. Jehovah’s Witnesses are energetically engaged in that work today.</p><p><sup>21 </sup>What, though, does this fresh understanding of the parable of the sheep and the goats mean to us? Well, people are already taking sides. Some are on ‘the broad road leading off into destruction,’ while others try to stay on ‘the cramped road leading off into life.’ (Matthew 7:13, 14) But the time when Jesus will pronounce final judgment on the sheep and the goats depicted in the parable is yet ahead. When the Son of man comes in the role of Judge, he will determine that many true Christians<wbr />—actually “a great crowd” of dedicated sheep—<wbr />will qualify to pass through the final part of “the great tribulation” into the new world. That prospect should now be a source of joy. (Revelation 7:9, 14) On the other hand, vast numbers out of “all the nations” will have proved themselves to be like stubborn goats. They “will depart into everlasting cutting-off.” What a relief for the earth!</p><p><sup>22 </sup>While the judging as described in the parable is in the near future, even <em>now </em>something vital is taking place. We Christians are engaged in a lifesaving work of proclaiming a message that causes a division among people. (Matthew 10:32-39) Paul wrote: “For ‘everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.’ However, how will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?” (Romans 10:13, 14) Our public ministry is reaching people in over 230 lands with the name of God and his message of salvation. The anointed brothers of Christ are still spearheading this work. Some five million of the other sheep have now joined them. And people around the globe are responding to the message proclaimed by Jesus’ brothers.</p><p><sup>23 </sup>Many are exposed to our message as we preach from house to house or informally. Others may learn of Jehovah’s Witnesses and what we represent in ways unknown to us. When judgment time arrives, to what extent will Jesus consider community responsibility and family merit? We cannot say, and it is pointless to speculate. (Compare 1 Corinthians 7:14.) Many now turn a deaf ear, ridicule, or share in outright persecution of God’s people. Hence, this is a crucial time; such ones may be developing into those whom Jesus will judge as goats.<wbr />—Matthew 10:22; John 15:20; 16:2, 3; Romans 2:5, 6.</p><p><sup>24 </sup>Happily, though, many respond favorably, study God’s Word, and become Witnesses of Jehovah. Some who at present seem goatlike may change and become like sheep. The point is that those responding and actively supporting the remnant of Christ’s brothers are thereby now giving evidence that will provide a basis for them to be placed on Jesus’ right hand when, in the near future, he sits down on his throne to render judgment. These are being and will continue to be blessed. Thus, this parable should spur us on to more zealous activity in the Christian ministry. Before it is too late, we want to do all we can to proclaim the good news of the Kingdom and in that way give others the opportunity to respond. Then it is up to Jesus to render judgment, condemnatory or favorable.<wbr />—Matthew 25:46.</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p>See <em>The Watchtower </em>of February 15, 1994, pages 16-21.</p><p><em>El Evangelio de Mateo </em>notes: “Eternal life is definitive life; its opposite is definitive punishment. The Greek adjective <em>aionios </em>does not primarily denote duration, but quality. The definitive punishment is death forever.”<wbr />—Retired professor Juan Mateos (Pontifical Biblical Institute, Rome) and Professor Fernando Camacho (Theological Center, Seville), Madrid, Spain, 1981.</p><p><strong>Do You Recall?</strong></p><p>□ What parallels between Matthew 24:29-31 and Matthew 25:31-33 show that the parable of the sheep and the goats has a future application, and when is that?</p><p>□ Who are “the least” of Jesus’ brothers?</p><p>□ How does Jesus’ use of the expression “righteous ones” help us to identify whom these represent and whom they do not represent?</p><p>□ Though the parable will be fulfilled in the future, why is our preaching now important and urgent?</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p> 1, 2. Why should the parable of the sheep and the goats interest us?</p><p> 3. Earlier in his discourse, what did Jesus say would develop immediately after the great tribulation begins?</p><p> 4. What opening mention does the parable of the sheep and the goats make about Jesus, and who else comes into the picture?</p><p> 5. How can we identify Jesus’ “brothers”?</p><p> 6. Who are “the least” of Jesus’ brothers?</p><p> 7, 8. What did Jesus say about the sheep, so what can we conclude about them?</p><p> 9. Why does the parable not apply during the Millennium?</p><p>10, 11. (a) Why is it unreasonable to think that the sheep include everyone doing a kind deed to Jesus’ brothers? (b) Whom do the sheep fittingly represent?</p><p>12. Why might the sheep ask how they had done kindnesses to Jesus?</p><p>13. Why might goatlike ones address Jesus as “Lord”?</p><p>14. On what basis will Jesus judge the sheep and the goats?</p><p>15. (a) How have many shown themselves to be like goats? (b) Why should we avoid stating whether someone is a sheep or a goat?</p><p>16, 17. What future will the sheep have?</p><p>18, 19. (a) Jesus will render what judgment of the goats? (b) How can we be sure that the goats will not face eternal suffering?</p><p>20, 21. (a) Christians have what important work to do? (b) What dividing is now going on? (c) What will be the situation of people when the parable of the sheep and the goats begins to be fulfilled?</p><p>22, 23. Since the parable’s outworking is yet future, why is our preaching work today vital?</p><p>24. (a) Why is it important for individuals to respond favorably to our preaching? (b) This study has helped you personally to have what attitude toward your ministry?</p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Picture on page 24]</strong></p><p><strong>NOTE THE PARALLELS</strong></p><p><strong>Matthew 24:29-31                      Matthew 25:31-33</strong></p><p>After the great tribulation           Son of man arrives<br />begins, the Son of man comes</p><p>Comes with great glory                Arrives in glory and sits on<br />                                      his glorious throne</p><p>Angels present with him               Angels arrive with him</p><p>All tribes of earth see him           All nations gathered; goats<br />                                      judged finally (the great<br />                                      tribulation ends)</p><p><strong>[Credit Line]</strong></p><p>Garo Nalbandian</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014242.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***w08 1/15 pp. 20-24 Counted Worthy to Receive a Kingdom***</strong></a><br /><strong>Counted Worthy to Receive a Kingdom</strong></p><p>“This is a proof of the righteous judgment of God, leading to your being counted worthy of the kingdom of God.”<wbr />—2 THESS. 1:5.</p><p>ABOUT the year 50 of our Common Era, the apostle Paul was in Athens. Irritated by the rampant idolatry that he saw there, he was moved to give a masterly witness. He climaxed his words with a declaration that must have caught the attention of his pagan listeners. He said: “Now [God] is telling mankind that they should all everywhere repent. Because he has set a day in which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and he has furnished a guarantee to all men in that he has resurrected him from the dead.”<wbr />—Acts 17:30, 31.</p><p><sup>2 </sup>How sobering it is to reflect on the fact that God has set a future judgment day for mankind! That judgment will be by the one whom Paul did not name in his talk in Athens but whom we know to be the resurrected Jesus Christ. Judgment by Jesus will mean either life or death.</p><p><sup>3 </sup>That Judgment Day will be 1,000 years long. Jesus will preside over it in Jehovah’s name as King of God’s Kingdom, but he will not be alone. Jehovah chooses others from among mankind to reign with Jesus and judge during that millennium-long day. (Compare Luke 22:29, 30.) Almost 4,000 years ago, Jehovah laid the groundwork for that Judgment Day when he made a covenant with his faithful servant Abraham. (<em>Read Genesis 22:17, 18.</em>) That covenant evidently went into effect in 1943 B.C.E. Of course, Abraham was unable to grasp fully what the covenant would mean for mankind. We today, though, can see that under its terms, Abraham’s seed play a special role in the fulfillment of God’s purpose to judge mankind.</p><p><sup>4 </sup>The primary part of the seed of Abraham turned out to be Jesus, who in 29 C.E. was anointed with holy spirit and became the promised Messiah, or Christ. (Gal. 3:16) Jesus would spend the next three and a half years preaching the good news of the Kingdom to the Jewish nation. After the arrest of John the Baptist, Jesus showed that others could hope to share in that Kingdom when he said: “From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of the heavens is the goal toward which men press, and those pressing forward are seizing it.”<wbr />—Matt. 11:12.</p><p><sup>5 </sup>Interestingly, immediately before speaking of those who would ‘seize’ the Kingdom of the heavens, Jesus said: “Truly I say to you people, Among those born of women there has not been raised up a greater than John the Baptist; but a person that is a lesser one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he is.” (Matt. 11:11) Why was that? Because the hope of being part of the Kingdom arrangement was not fully opened up to faithful ones until holy spirit was poured out at Pentecost 33 C.E. By that time, John the Baptist had died.<wbr />—Acts 2:1-4.</p><p><strong>Abraham’s Seed Declared Righteous</strong></p><p><sup>6 </sup>Abraham was told that his seed would multiply and become “like the stars of the heavens” and the grains of sand on the seashore. (Gen. 13:16; 22:17) In other words, in Abraham’s time it was impossible for humans to know how many would make up this seed. However, the exact number of his spiritual seed was eventually revealed. In addition to Jesus, it was to number 144,000.<wbr />—Rev. 7:4; 14:1.</p><p><sup>7 </sup>Regarding Abraham’s faith, God’s Word states: “[Abraham] put faith in Jehovah; and he proceeded to count it to him as righteousness.” (Gen. 15:5, 6) True, no human is <em>absolutely </em>righteous. (Jas. 3:2) Nevertheless, because of Abraham’s outstanding faith, Jehovah dealt with him as if he were righteous and even called him his friend. (Isa. 41:8) Those who make up the spiritual seed of Abraham along with Jesus have also been declared righteous, and this brings them even greater blessings than Abraham received.</p><p><sup>8 </sup>Anointed Christians are declared righteous because they exercise faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. (Rom. 3:24, 28) In Jehovah’s eyes, they are acquitted of sin and can be anointed with holy spirit to be spiritual sons of God, brothers of Jesus Christ. (John 1:12, 13) They come into the new covenant and form a new nation, “the Israel of God.” (Gal. 6:16; Luke 22:20) What a magnificent privilege all of that represents! As a result of these actions by God in their behalf, anointed Christians do not hope to live eternally on earth. They sacrifice that prospect for the unspeakable joy of being associated with Jesus during Judgment Day and ruling with him in the heavens.<wbr />—<em>Read Romans 8:17.</em></p><p><sup>9 </sup>At Pentecost 33 C.E., a group of faithful humans were given the opportunity to be among those who would rule with Jesus during Judgment Day. About 120 of Jesus’ disciples were baptized with holy spirit and thus became the first anointed Christians. However, for them, that was only a beginning. From then on, they had to demonstrate their loyalty to Jehovah despite all the tests that Satan would bring upon them. They had to be faithful until death if they were to receive the crown of heavenly life.<wbr />—Rev. 2:10.</p><p><sup>10 </sup>To this end, Jehovah through his Word and by means of the Christian congregation provided anointed Christians with the exhortation and encouragement that they needed. For example, the apostle Paul wrote to anointed Christians in Thessalonica: “As a father does his children, we kept exhorting each one of you, and consoling and bearing witness to you, to the end that you should go on walking worthily of God who is calling you to his kingdom and glory.”<wbr />—1 Thess. 2:11, 12.</p><p><sup>11 </sup>In the decades after the first members of the congregation of anointed Christians were chosen, Jehovah saw fit to have a permanent record made of the earthly ministry of Jesus as well as His dealings with and counsel to first-century anointed Christians. Jehovah thus added the inspired Christian Greek Scriptures to the already existing inspired Hebrew Scriptures. The Hebrew Scriptures were written in the first place for the fleshly nation of Israel during the time that they had a special relationship with God. The Christian Greek Scriptures were written primarily for “the Israel of God,” those anointed as brothers of Christ and spiritual sons of God. Of course, that in no way suggests that non-Israelites could not derive great benefit from studying the Hebrew Scriptures. Similarly, Christians who are not anointed with holy spirit derive immeasurable benefits from studying and living according to the counsel found in the Christian Greek Scriptures.<wbr />—<em>Read 2 Timothy 3:15-17.</em></p><p><sup>12 </sup>First-century Christians were declared righteous and anointed with holy spirit for the purpose of enabling them to receive their heavenly inheritance. Their anointing did not elevate them to kingship over fellow anointed Christians while still on earth. Evidently, some early Christians lost sight of that fact and began seeking undue prominence among their brothers in the congregation. As a result, Paul was moved to ask: “You men already have your fill, do you? You are rich already, are you? You have begun ruling as kings without us, have you? And I wish indeed that you had begun ruling as kings, that we also might rule with you as kings.” (1 Cor. 4:8) Therefore, Paul reminded anointed ones of his day: “Not that we are the masters over your faith, but we are fellow workers for your joy.”<wbr />—2 Cor. 1:24.</p><p><strong>Completing the Foretold Number</strong></p><p><sup>13 </sup>Not all 144,000 anointed Christians were selected in the first century. Their calling continued throughout the apostolic period and then apparently slowed down. However, it did continue throughout the succeeding centuries into modern times. (Matt. 28:20) Eventually, after Jesus began to reign in 1914, things moved ahead rapidly.</p><p><sup>14 </sup>First, Jesus cleansed the heavens of all vestiges of opposition to godly rule. (<em>Read Revelation 12:10, 12.</em>) Then he turned his attention to the gathering of the remaining prospective members of his Kingdom government so as to complete the number of 144,000. By the mid-1930’s, that task was evidently well along and many of those responding to the preaching work did not have the desire to go to heaven. The spirit was not bearing witness with them that they were sons of God. (Compare Romans 8:16.) Rather, they identified themselves with the “other sheep,” who have the hope of living forever on a paradise earth. (John 10:16) Hence, after 1935 the thrust of the preaching work turned to the gathering of “a great crowd,” those whom the apostle John saw in vision and who would survive “the great tribulation.”<wbr />—Rev. 7:9, 10, 14.</p><p><sup>15 </sup>Even so, over the years since the 1930’s, a few individuals have been called to a heavenly hope. Why? In some cases, it could be that they replaced individuals previously called who had become unfaithful. (Compare Revelation 3:16.) Paul even spoke of personal acquaintances who had left the truth. (Phil. 3:17-19) Whom would Jehovah call to serve as such replacements? Of course, that is his decision to make. Still, it would seem reasonable that he would call, not newly converted ones, but individuals who<wbr />—like the disciples to whom Jesus spoke when he initiated the Memorial observance—<wbr />have already proved their loyalty to an extent.<wbr />—Luke 22:28.</p><p><sup>16 </sup>It seems, however, that not all who have been called to a heavenly hope since the 1930’s are replacements for ones who have fallen away. Jehovah has evidently made sure that we will have anointed Christians among us all through the final days of this system of things until the destruction of “Babylon the Great.” (Rev. 17:5) And we can be confident that the full number of 144,000 members will be completed in Jehovah’s due time and that all will eventually take their place in the Kingdom government. We can also believe the prophetic Word that the ever-growing great crowd will as a group continue to prove itself faithful. Soon it will “come out of the great tribulation” brought upon Satan’s world and will joyfully move on into God’s new world.</p><p><strong>God’s Heavenly Government Is Almost Complete!</strong></p><p><sup>17 </sup>Since 33 C.E., tens of thousands of anointed Christians have manifested strong faith and have endured faithfully until death. These have already been counted worthy of receiving the Kingdom and<wbr />—evidently starting in the early days of Christ’s presence—<wbr />have been rewarded accordingly.<wbr /><em>—Read 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17; Revelation 6:9-11.</em></p><p><sup>18 </sup>Those of the anointed who still remain on earth are absolutely confident that if they remain faithful, they will soon receive the reward for their faithful course. Millions of other sheep, when contemplating the faith of their anointed brothers, agree with the words of the apostle Paul, who said of anointed brothers in Thessalonica: “We ourselves take pride in you among the congregations of God because of your endurance and faith in all your persecutions and the tribulations that you are bearing. This is a proof of the righteous judgment of God, leading to your being counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are indeed suffering.” (2 Thess. 1:3-5) With the passing of the last member of the anointed from the earth, whenever that will happen, God’s heavenly government will be complete. What a cause for joy that will be<wbr />—both in heaven and on earth!</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p>See the March 1, 1992, issue of <em>The Watchtower, </em>page 20, paragraph 17.</p><p>See “Questions From Readers” in the May 1, 2007, issue of <em>The Watchtower.</em></p><p><strong>Can You Explain?</strong></p><p>• What did God reveal to Abraham that had a bearing on Judgment Day?</p><p>• Why was Abraham declared righteous?</p><p>• What does being declared righteous lead to for those of Abraham’s seed?</p><p>• What confidence do all Christians have?</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p>1, 2. What is God’s purpose as to judging, and who will do the judging?</p><p> 3. Why did Jehovah make a covenant with Abraham, and who play a special role in its fulfillment?</p><p>4, 5. (a) Who is the primary part of the seed of Abraham, and what did he say about the Kingdom? (b) When was the hope to be part of the Kingdom arrangement opened up?</p><p>6, 7. (a) In what way was Abraham’s seed to become “like the stars of the heavens”? (b) What blessing did Abraham receive, and what similar blessing does his seed receive?</p><p> 8. What blessings are opened up to members of Abraham’s seed?</p><p>9, 10. (a) When were Christians first anointed with holy spirit, and what lay ahead of them? (b) What help did anointed Christians receive?</p><p>11. What written provision did Jehovah make for members of “the Israel of God”?</p><p>12. What reminder did Paul give to anointed Christians?</p><p>13. How did the calling of the anointed progress after 33 C.E.?</p><p>14, 15. What has occurred in our time with regard to the calling of the anointed?</p><p>16. Regarding the anointed, for what are we grateful, and what can we confidently believe?</p><p>17. According to 1 Thessalonians 4:15-17 and Revelation 6:9-11, what has happened to anointed Christians who died faithful?</p><p>18. (a) Those of the anointed who still remain have what confidence? (b) How do those of the other sheep view their anointed Christian brothers?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 20]</strong></p><p>Jesus encouraged his followers to reach out for the Kingdom</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 21]</strong></p><p>At Pentecost 33 C.E., Jehovah began selecting the secondary members of Abraham’s seed</p><p><strong>[Pictures on page 23]</strong></p><p>The other sheep are grateful that anointed Christians have been with them during the last days</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014242.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w08 7/15 pp. 17-21 You Do Not Know Where It Will Have Success!***</strong></a><br /><strong>You Do Not Know Where It Will Have Success!</strong></p><p>“In the morning sow your seed and until the evening do not let your hand rest; for you are not knowing where this will have success.”<wbr />—ECCL. 11:6.</p><p>A FARMER needs to be patient. (Jas. 5:7) After sowing the seed, he needs to wait for it to sprout and grow. Gradually, when conditions are favorable, shoots begin to appear, breaking through the surface of the ground. Then they develop into plants that sprout heads of grain. Eventually, the farmer has a field ready to be harvested. How amazing it is to witness the miracle of growth! How humbling, too, to realize who is the Source of this growth. We can nurture the seed. We can assist with the watering process. But only God can make it grow.<wbr />—Compare 1 Corinthians 3:6.</p><p><sup>2 </sup>As mentioned in the preceding article, Jesus likened the Kingdom-preaching work to a farmer’s sowing of seed. In the illustration of the different types of soil, Jesus emphasized that even though the farmer sows good seed, the heart condition of an individual determines whether the seed grows to maturity or not. (Mark 4:3-9) In the illustration of the sower who sleeps, Jesus highlighted that the farmer does not fully understand the process of growth. This is because growth is due to God’s power, not to human efforts. (Mark 4:26-29) Let us now consider three more of Jesus’ illustrations<wbr />—the mustard grain, the leaven, and the dragnet.</p><p><strong>The Illustration of the Mustard Grain</strong></p><p><sup>3 </sup>The illustration of the mustard grain, also recorded in Mark chapter 4, highlights two things: first, the amazing growth of the Kingdom message; second, the protection given to those who accept the message. Jesus said: “With what are we to liken the kingdom of God, or in what illustration shall we set it out? Like a mustard grain, which at the time it was sown in the ground was the tiniest of all the seeds that are on the earth<wbr />—but when it has been sown, it comes up and becomes greater than all other vegetables and produces great branches, so that the birds of the heaven are able to find lodging under its shadow.”<wbr />—Mark 4:30-32.</p><p><sup>4 </sup>Here we find portrayed the growth of “the kingdom of God” as evidenced by the spread of the Kingdom message and the growth of the Christian congregation from Pentecost 33 C.E. onward. A mustard grain is a tiny seed that can represent something very small. (Compare Luke 17:6.) Eventually, though, a mustard plant may attain a height of from 10 to 15 feet <strong>[3-5 m] </strong>and have sturdy branches, thus virtually becoming a tree.<wbr />—Matt. 13:31, 32.</p><p><sup>5 </sup>The growth of the Christian congregation started in a small way in 33 C.E. when about 120 disciples were anointed with holy spirit. Within a relatively short period of time, this tiny congregation of disciples came to include thousands of believers. (<em>Read Acts 2:41; 4:4; 5:28; 6:7; 12:24; 19:20.</em>) Within three decades, the number of harvest workers had expanded so much that the apostle Paul could say to the congregation in Colossae that the good news had already been “preached in all creation that is under heaven.” (Col. 1:23) What spectacular growth!</p><p><sup>6 </sup>Since the establishment of God’s Kingdom in heaven in 1914, the branches of the mustard “tree” have expanded beyond expectations. God’s people have seen the literal fulfillment of the prophecy recorded by Isaiah: “The little one himself will become a thousand, and the small one a mighty nation.” (Isa. 60:22) The small group of anointed ones associated with the Kingdom work early in the 20th century had no way of knowing that by the year 2008, about seven million Witnesses would be engaging in this work in over 230 lands. Truly amazing growth, comparable to that of the mustard grain in Jesus’ illustration!</p><p><sup>7 </sup>But does the growth stop there? No. The subjects of God’s Kingdom will eventually encompass the entire earth. All opposers will have been removed. This will not occur as a result of human efforts but because of the intervention of the Sovereign Lord Jehovah in earth’s affairs. (<em>Read Daniel 2:34, 35.</em>) We will then see the final fulfillment of another prophecy recorded by Isaiah: “The earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”<wbr />—Isa. 11:9.</p><p><sup>8 </sup>Jesus says that the birds of the heaven are able to find lodging under the shadow of this Kingdom. These birds do not represent enemies of the Kingdom who try to eat up the good seeds, as was true of the birds in the illustration of the man who scattered seed on different kinds of soil. (Mark 4:4) Rather, in this illustration the birds represent righthearted ones who seek protection within the confines of the Christian congregation. Even now, these ones are protected from the spiritually defiling habits and unclean practices of this wicked world. (Compare Isaiah 32:1, 2.) Jehovah similarly likened the Messianic Kingdom to a tree and stated prophetically: “On the mountain of the height of Israel I shall transplant it, and it will certainly bear boughs and produce fruit and become a majestic cedar. And under it there will actually reside all the birds of every wing; in the shadow of its foliage they will reside.”<wbr />—Ezek. 17:23.</p><p><strong>The Illustration of the Leaven</strong></p><p><sup>9 </sup>Growth is not always visible to human eyes. In his next illustration, Jesus emphasizes this point. He says: “The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three large measures of flour, until the whole mass was fermented.” (Matt. 13:33) What does this leaven represent, and how does it relate to the growth of the Kingdom?</p><p><sup>10 </sup>In the Bible, leaven is often used to represent sin. The apostle Paul referred to leaven in this way when speaking of the corrupting influence of a sinner in the congregation in ancient Corinth. (1 Cor. 5:6-8) Was Jesus now using leaven to represent the growth of something negative?</p><p><sup>11 </sup>Before answering that question, we need to take note of three basic facts. First, although Jehovah did not allow leaven during the time of the Passover festival, at other times he did accept sacrifices that contained leaven. Leaven was used in connection with thanksgiving communion offerings, in which the offerer voluntarily made his presentation in a spirit of thankfulness for Jehovah’s many blessings. This meal was one of cheerfulness.<wbr />—Lev. 7:11-15.</p><p><sup>12 </sup>Second, although an element may on one occasion have a negative connotation in the Scriptures, on another occasion the same element may be used to represent something positive. For example, at 1 Peter 5:8, Satan is likened to a lion, picturing his dangerous, vicious nature. But at Revelation 5:5, Jesus is likened to a lion<wbr />—“the Lion that is of the tribe of Judah.” In the latter case, the lion is used as a symbol of courageous justice.</p><p><sup>13 </sup>Third, in Jesus’ illustration, he did not say that the leaven corrupted the whole mass of flour, making it unusable. He simply referred to the normal process of making bread. The housewife deliberately added the leaven, and the results were positive. The leaven <em>was hidden in the mass of flour. </em>Thus, the leavening process was hidden from the view of the housewife. This reminds us of the man who sows seed and sleeps at night. Jesus said that “the seed sprouts and grows tall, just how [the man] does not know.” (Mark 4:27) What a simple way to illustrate the unseen progression of spiritual growth! We may not see the growth initially, but eventually its results become manifest.</p><p><sup>14 </sup>Not only is this growth unseen to human eyes but <em>it is also pervasive. </em>This is another aspect emphasized in the illustration of the leaven. The leaven ferments the whole mass, all “three large measures of flour.” (Luke 13:21) Like leaven, the Kingdom-preaching work that has prompted this spiritual growth has expanded to the point that the Kingdom is now being preached “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8; Matt. 24:14) What a wonderful privilege it is to be part of this amazing expansion of the Kingdom work!</p><p><strong>The Dragnet</strong></p><p><sup>15 </sup>More important than the number of those who claim to be disciples of Jesus Christ is the quality of those disciples. Jesus alludes to this aspect of Kingdom growth when he gives another illustration, one about a dragnet. He said: “Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a dragnet let down into the sea and gathering up fish of every kind.”<wbr />—Matt. 13:47.</p><p><sup>16 </sup>The dragnet, which represents the Kingdom-preaching work, gathers fish of every kind. Jesus goes on to say: “When [the dragnet] got full they hauled it up onto the beach and, sitting down, they collected the fine ones into vessels, but the unsuitable they threw away. That is how it will be in the conclusion of the system of things: the angels will go out and separate the wicked from among the righteous and will cast them into the fiery furnace. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.”<wbr />—Matt. 13:48-50.</p><p><sup>17 </sup>Does this separating refer to the final judgment of the sheep and the goats that Jesus said would occur when he arrived in his glory? (Matt. 25:31-33) No. That final judgment will occur at Jesus’ coming during the great tribulation. By contrast, the separating referred to in the illustration of the dragnet occurs during “the conclusion of the system of things.” This is the time in which we are now living<wbr />—the days leading up to the great tribulation. So how is a separating work taking place now?</p><p><sup>18 </sup>Literally millions of symbolic fish from the sea of humanity have been attracted to Jehovah’s congregation in modern times. Some attend the Memorial, others come to our meetings, and still others are happy to study the Bible. But do all of these prove to be genuine Christians? They may be “hauled up onto the beach,” but Jesus tells us that only “the fine ones” are gathered into vessels, which represent Christian congregations. The unsuitable are thrown away, eventually to be cast into a symbolic fiery furnace, denoting future destruction.</p><p><sup>19 </sup>As with the unsuitable fish, many who once studied the Bible with Jehovah’s people have stopped studying. Some born to Christian parents have never really wanted to become footstep followers of Jesus. They have been unwilling to make the decision to serve Jehovah or after serving him for a while have ceased doing so. (Ezek. 33:32, 33) It is imperative, though, that all honesthearted ones allow themselves to be gathered into the vessellike congregations before the final day of judgment and to remain in a place of safety.</p><p><sup>20 </sup>So, what have we learned from our brief review of Jesus’ illustrations concerning growth? First, like the growth of the mustard grain, there has been a tremendous growth in the Kingdom interests here on earth. Nothing can stop the spread of Jehovah’s work! (Isa. 54:17) Additionally, spiritual protection has been provided for those who have sought “lodging under [the tree’s] shadow.” Second, it is God who makes it grow. Just as the hidden leaven spread through the whole mass, this growth has not always been readily discernible or understood, but spread it does! Third, not all those who responded have proved themselves suitable. Some have been like the unsuitable fish in Jesus’ illustration.</p><p><sup>21 </sup>How encouraging, though, it is to see so many suitable ones being drawn by Jehovah! (John 6:44) This has resulted in spectacular increases in country after country. All glory for this growth goes to Jehovah God. Witnessing this, each of us should be motivated to obey the admonition written centuries ago: “In the morning sow your seed . . . , for you are not knowing where this will have success, either here or there, or whether both of them will alike be good.”<wbr />—Eccl. 11:6.</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p>The following explanations are an adjustment to what was previously explained in the June 15, 1992, issue of <em>The Watchtower, </em>pages 17-22, and the October 1, 1975, issue, pages 589-608.</p><p>Although Matthew 13:39-43 refers to a different aspect of the Kingdom-preaching work, the time of its fulfillment parallels the time of the fulfillment of the dragnet illustration, namely, during “the conclusion of the system of things.” The separating of the symbolic fish is an ongoing process, just as the sowing and harvesting work is continual throughout this time period.<wbr />—<em>The Watchtower, </em>October 15, 2000, pages 25-26; <em>Worship the Only True God, </em>pages 178-181, paragraphs 8-11.</p><p>Does this mean that everyone who has stopped studying or associating with Jehovah’s people has been thrown away as unsuitable by the angels? No! If someone sincerely desires to return to Jehovah, he will find the way open.<wbr />—Mal. 3:7.</p><p><strong>How Would You Answer?</strong></p><p>• What does Jesus’ illustration about the mustard grain teach us about Kingdom growth and spiritual protection?</p><p>• What does the leaven in Jesus’ illustration represent, and what truth about Kingdom growth does Jesus highlight?</p><p>• What aspect of Kingdom growth is pointed out in the illustration of the dragnet?</p><p>• How can we make sure that we remain among those who have been ‘collected into vessels’?</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p> 1. Why is witnessing the growth process both amazing and humbling?</p><p> 2. What points did Jesus teach about spiritual growth in the illustrations considered in the preceding article?</p><p>3, 4. The illustration of the mustard grain highlights what aspects concerning the Kingdom message?</p><p> 5. What growth was experienced by the first-century Christian congregation?</p><p>6, 7. (a) What expansion has taken place since 1914? (b) What further growth will take place?</p><p> 8. (a) Whom do the birds in Jesus’ illustration represent? (b) From what are we protected even now?</p><p>9, 10. (a) What point did Jesus emphasize in the illustration of the leaven? (b) In the Bible, what does leaven often represent, and what question about Jesus’ reference to leaven will we consider?</p><p>11. How was leaven used in Israel of old?</p><p>12. What can we learn from the way the Bible uses word pictures?</p><p>13. What does Jesus’ illustration of the leaven show about spiritual growth?</p><p>14. What aspect of the preaching work is illustrated by the fact that the leaven ferments the whole mass?</p><p>15, 16. (a) Summarize the illustration of the dragnet. (b) What does the dragnet represent, and to what aspect of Kingdom growth does this illustration allude?</p><p>17. The separating mentioned in the illustration of the dragnet refers to what time period?</p><p>18, 19. (a) How is a separating work taking place now? (b) What step must honesthearted ones take? (See also footnote on page 21.)</p><p>20, 21. (a) What have we learned from reviewing Jesus’ illustrations concerning growth? (b) What are you determined to do?</p><p><strong>[Pictures on page 18]</strong></p><p>What does the illustration of the mustard grain teach us about Kingdom increase?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 19]</strong></p><p>What do we learn from the illustration of the leaven?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 21]</strong></p><p>What is pictured by the separating of the fine fish from the unsuitable fish?</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014242.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w13 7/15 pp. 9-14 “Look! I Am With You All the Days”***</strong></a><br /><strong>“Look! I Am With You <em>All </em>the Days”</strong></p><p>“Look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”<wbr />—MATT. 28:20.</p><p><strong>LOOK FOR THE ANSWERS TO THESE QUESTIONS:</strong></p><p>Why can we conclude that from the first century C.E. until today, there have always been anointed Christians on earth?</p><p>Starting in 1914, what inspection by Jesus took place?</p><p>What events depicted in Jesus’ illustration about the wheat and the weeds still lie ahead?</p><p>ONE of Jesus’ Kingdom illustrations describes a farmer who sows fine seed of wheat and an enemy who sows weeds among the fine seed. The weeds overgrow the wheat, but the farmer orders his slaves to “let both grow together until the harvest.” During harvest season, the weeds are destroyed and the wheat is gathered. Jesus himself explained the illustration. <strong>(<em>Read Matthew 13:24-30, 37-43.</em>) </strong>What does this parable reveal? (See the chart “The Wheat and the Weeds.”)</p><p><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The events taking place in that farmer’s field illustrate how and when Jesus would gather out of mankind the entire wheat class<wbr />—anointed Christians who will rule with him in his Kingdom. The sowing began at Pentecost 33 C.E. The gathering will be complete when the anointed who are alive at the end of this system of things receive their final sealing and then are taken to heaven. (Matt. 24:31; Rev. 7:1-4) Just as a lookout point on a mountain provides a person with a sweeping view of his surroundings, so this parable gives us a panoramic view of developments that would occur during a period of some 2,000 years. From our vantage point, what developments related to the Kingdom do we discern? The parable describes a time of sowing, growth, and harvesting. This article will focus mainly on the harvesttime.</p><p><strong>UNDER JESUS’ WATCHFUL CARE</strong></p><p><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>At the dawn of the second century C.E., “the weeds appeared” when imitation Christians became visible in the world field. (Matt. 13:26) By the fourth century, weedlike Christians had greatly outnumbered anointed Christians. Recall that in the parable, the slaves asked their master for permission to uproot the weeds. (Matt. 13:28) How did the master respond?</p><p><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Speaking about the wheat and the weeds, Jesus said: “Let both grow together until the harvest.” This command reveals that from the first century until today, there have always been some anointed wheatlike Christians on earth. That conclusion is confirmed by what Jesus later told his disciples: “I am with you <em>all </em>the days until the conclusion of the system of things.” (Matt. 28:20) So anointed Christians would be protected by Jesus all the days leading up to the time of the end. However, since they were overgrown by weedlike Christians, we do not know for certain who belonged to the wheat class during that long period of time. However, some decades before the start of the harvest season, the wheat class became discernible. How did that come about?</p><p><strong>A MESSENGER ‘CLEARS UP A WAY’</strong></p><p><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Centuries before Jesus gave the illustration of the wheat and the weeds, Jehovah inspired his prophet Malachi to foretell events that are reflected in Jesus’ illustration. <strong>(<em>Read Malachi 3:1-4.</em>) </strong>John the Baptizer was the ‘messenger who cleared up the way.’ (Matt. 11:10, 11) When he came in 29 C.E., a time of judgment for the nation of Israel had drawn close. Jesus was the second messenger. He cleansed the temple in Jerusalem twice<wbr />—first at the start of his ministry and second toward the end. (Matt. 21:12, 13; John 2:14-17) Hence, Jesus’ cleansing work involved a period of time.</p><p><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>What is the larger fulfillment of Malachi’s prophecy? During the decades leading up to 1914, C. T. Russell and his close associates did a work like that of John the Baptizer. That vital work involved restoring Bible truths. The Bible Students taught the true meaning of Christ’s ransom sacrifice, exposed the hellfire lie, and proclaimed the coming end of the Gentile Times. Still, there were numerous religious groups who claimed to be Christ’s followers. So a crucial question needed to be answered: Who among those groups were the wheat? To settle that question, Jesus began to inspect the spiritual temple in 1914. That inspection and cleansing work involved a period of time<wbr />—from 1914 to the early part of 1919.</p><p><strong>YEARS OF INSPECTION AND CLEANSING</strong></p><p><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When Jesus began his inspection, what did he find? A small group of zealous Bible Students who for well over 30 years had given their strength and fortunes to pursue a vigorous preaching campaign. What a joy it must have been for Jesus and the angels to find that those relatively few but sturdy wheat stalks had not been choked by Satan’s weeds! Still, there arose a need to “cleanse the sons of Levi,” the anointed ones. (Mal. 3:2, 3; 1 Pet. 4:17) Why so?</p><p><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>In late 1914, some Bible Students were disheartened because they had not gone to heaven. During 1915 and 1916, opposition from outside the organization slowed down the preaching work. Worse, after Brother Russell’s death in October 1916, opposition arose from inside the organization. Four of the seven directors of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society rebelled against the decision to have Brother Rutherford take the lead. They tried to cause division among the brothers, but in August 1917, they left Bethel<wbr />—a cleansing indeed! Also, some Bible Students gave in to the fear of man. Still, as a whole they willingly responded to Jesus’ cleansing work and made the needed changes. Hence, Jesus judged them to be true Christian wheat, but he rejected all imitation Christians, including all of those found within the churches of Christendom. (Mal. 3:5; 2 Tim. 2:19) What happened next? To find out, let us return to our consideration of the parable of the wheat and the weeds.</p><p><strong>WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THE HARVEST SEASON BEGINS?</strong></p><p><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“The harvest is a conclusion of a system of things,” said Jesus. (Matt. 13:39) That harvest season began in 1914. We will consider five developments that Jesus foretold for that time.</p><p><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>First, <strong>collecting the weeds. </strong>Jesus says: “In the harvest season I will tell the reapers, First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles.” After 1914, the angels began to “collect” weedlike Christians by separating them from the anointed “sons of the kingdom.”<wbr />—Matt. 13:30, 38, 41.</p><p><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>As the collecting work progressed, the distinction between the two groups became ever clearer. (Rev. 18:1, 4) By 1919, it became evident that Babylon the Great had fallen. What especially set true Christians apart from imitation ones? The preaching work. Those taking the lead among the Bible Students began to stress the importance of sharing personally in the Kingdom preaching work. For instance, <em>To Whom the Work Is Entrusted, </em>a pamphlet published in 1919, urged <em>all </em>anointed Christians to preach from house to house. It stated: “The work appears stupendous, but it is the Lord’s, and in his strength we will perform it. You have the privilege of sharing in it.” What was the response? From that time onward, reported <em>The Watch Tower </em>in 1922, the Bible Students stepped up their preaching activities. Before long, preaching from house to house became a hallmark of those faithful Christians<wbr />—as it is till this day.</p><p><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Second, <strong>gathering the wheat. </strong>Jesus commands his angels: “Go to gathering the wheat into my storehouse.” (Matt. 13:30) Since 1919, anointed ones have been gathered into the restored Christian congregation. For those anointed Christians who will be alive at the end of this system of things, the final gathering will take place when they receive their heavenly reward.<wbr />—Dan. 7:18, 22, 27.</p><p><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Third, <strong>weeping and gnashing. </strong>After the angels bundle the weeds, what happens? Speaking about the condition of the weed class, Jesus states: “There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be.” (Matt. 13:42) Is that happening right now? No. Today, Christendom, as part of the harlot, still says about herself: “I sit a queen, and I am no widow, and I shall never see mourning.” (Rev. 18:7) Indeed, Christendom feels very much in charge, even presuming to ‘sit as a queen’ atop the class of political leaders. Presently, those represented by the weeds are boasting, not weeping. But that is about to change.</p><p><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>During the great tribulation, after all organized false religion has been destroyed, former adherents will run for cover but will find no secure place to hide. (Luke 23:30; Rev. 6:15-17) Then, realizing that there is no escape from destruction, they will weep in desperation and ‘gnash their teeth’ in anger. As Jesus foretells in his prophecy about the great tribulation, at that dark moment, they “will beat themselves in lamentation.”<wbr />—Matt. 24:30; Rev. 1:7.</p><p><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Fourth, <strong>pitched into the furnace. </strong>What will happen to the bundles of weeds? The angels “will pitch them into the fiery furnace.” (Matt. 13:42) That means complete destruction. Hence, those former adherents of false religious organizations will be destroyed during the final part of the great tribulation, Armageddon.<wbr />—Mal. 4:1.</p><p><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Fifth, <strong>shining brightly. </strong>Jesus ends his prophecy by saying: “At that time the righteous ones will shine as brightly as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.” (Matt. 13:43) When and where will that be? The fulfillment of these words still lies ahead. Jesus foretold, not an activity currently taking place on earth, but a future event occurring in heaven. Consider two reasons for this conclusion.</p><p><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>First, the “when” question. Jesus said: “At <em>that time </em>the righteous ones will shine.” The phrase “at that time” evidently refers to the event that Jesus had just mentioned, namely, the ‘pitching of the weeds into the fiery furnace.’ That occurs during the final part of the great tribulation. Thus, the ‘shining brightly’ of the anointed must occur at that future time as well. Second, the “where” question. Jesus said that the righteous ones will ‘shine <em>in </em>the kingdom.’ What does that mean? All faithful anointed ones who are still on earth after the initial part of the great tribulation has passed will already have received their final sealing. Then, as indicated in Jesus’ prophecy about the great tribulation, they will be gathered to heaven. (Matt. 24:31) <em>There </em>they will shine <em>“in </em>the kingdom of their Father,” and shortly after the battle of Armageddon, they will share as Jesus’ joyous bride in “the marriage of the Lamb.”<wbr />—Rev. 19:6-9.</p><p><strong>HOW WE BENEFIT</strong></p><p><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>How do we personally benefit from the panoramic view that this parable provides? Consider three ways. First, it deepens our insight. The parable reveals an important reason why Jehovah permits wickedness. He “tolerated . . . vessels of wrath” to prepare the “vessels of mercy”<wbr />—the wheat class. (Rom. 9:22-24) Second, it strengthens our confidence. As the end draws near, our enemies will intensify their fight against us, “but they will not prevail.” <strong>(<em>Read Jeremiah 1:19.</em>) </strong>Just as Jehovah through the ages protected the wheat class, so our heavenly Father by means of Jesus and the angels will be with us <em>“all </em>the days” to come.<wbr />—Matt. 28:20.</p><p><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Third, the parable enables us to identify the wheat class. Why is that of vital importance? Knowing who the wheatlike Christians are is essential to finding the answer to a question raised by Jesus in his extensive prophecy about the last days. He asked: “Who really is the faithful and discreet slave?” (Matt. 24:45) The following two articles will provide a satisfying answer to that question.</p><p><strong>ENDNOTES: </strong>(To be read as footnotes with the corresponding paragraphs.)</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p><strong>Paragraph 2: </strong>To refresh your memory on the meaning of the other parts of the parable, we encourage you to read the article “The Righteous Ones Will Shine as Brightly as the Sun” in <em>The Watchtower </em>of March 15, 2010.</p><p><strong>Paragraph 3: </strong>Since Jesus’ apostles had died and the remaining anointed ones on earth were pictured, not by slaves, but by wheat, these slaves well picture the angels. Later in the illustration, those reaping the weeds are identified as angels.<wbr />—Matt. 13:39.</p><p><strong>Paragraph 6: </strong>This is an adjustment in understanding. Previously, we thought that Jesus’ inspection took place in 1918.</p><p><strong>Paragraph 7: </strong>From 1910 to 1914, the Bible Students distributed nearly 4,000,000 books and over 200,000,000 tracts and pamphlets.</p><p><strong>Paragraph 14: </strong>This is an adjustment to our understanding of Matthew 13:42. Previously, our publications stated that imitation Christians have been ‘weeping and gnashing their teeth’ for decades, bewailing that “the sons of the kingdom” expose them for what they are<wbr />—“sons of the wicked one.” (Matt. 13:38) It should be noted, however, that the idea of the gnashing of teeth is connected to destruction.<wbr />—Ps. 112:10.</p><p><strong>Paragraph 16: </strong>Daniel 12:3 states that “the ones having insight [anointed Christians] will shine like the brightness of the expanse.” While still on earth, they do this by sharing in the preaching work. However, Matthew 13:43 points to the time when they will shine brightly in the heavenly Kingdom. Previously, we thought that both scriptures referred to the same activity<wbr />—the preaching work.</p><p><strong>Paragraph 18: </strong>See the book <em>Draw Close to Jehovah, </em>pages 288-289.</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p> <strong>1. </strong>(a) Summarize the illustration of the wheat and the weeds. (b) How did Jesus explain its meaning?</p><p> <strong>2. </strong>(a) What is illustrated by the events taking place in the farmer’s field? (b) What part of the parable will we consider?</p><p> <strong>3. </strong>(a) What condition developed after the first century? (b) According to Matthew 13:28, what question was raised, and by whom? (See also endnote.)</p><p> <strong>4. </strong>(a) What is revealed by the answer of the Master, Jesus? (b) When did wheatlike Christians become discernible?</p><p> <strong>5. </strong>How was Malachi’s prophecy fulfilled in the first century?</p><p> <strong>6. </strong>(a) What is the larger fulfillment of Malachi’s prophecy? (b) During what time period did Jesus inspect the spiritual temple? (See also endnote.)</p><p> <strong>7. </strong>When Jesus began his inspection in 1914, what did he find?</p><p> <strong>8. </strong>What developments took place after 1914?</p><p><strong>9, 10. </strong>(a) What will we now consider about the harvest season? (b) What took place first during the harvest season?</p><p><strong>11. </strong>Till this day, what has set true Christians apart from imitation Christians?</p><p><strong>12. </strong>Since when has the wheat class been gathered?</p><p><strong>13. </strong>What does Revelation 18:7 reveal about the present attitude of the harlot, or Babylon the Great, including Christendom?</p><p><strong>14. </strong>(a) When and why will imitation Christians ‘gnash their teeth’? (b) How does our adjusted understanding of Matthew 13:42 harmonize with the thought expressed at Psalm 112:10? (See endnote.)</p><p><strong>15. </strong>What will happen to the weeds, and when will that event occur?</p><p><strong>16, 17. </strong>(a) What is the final event that Jesus mentions in his illustration? (b) Why do we conclude that the fulfillment of that event still lies ahead?</p><p><strong>18, 19. </strong>In what ways does an understanding of Jesus’ parable of the wheat and the weeds benefit us personally?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 9]</strong></p><p><strong>[Chart on pages 10, 11]</strong></p><p><strong>THE WHEAT AND THE WEEDS</strong></p><p>33 C.E. SOWING BEGINS</p><p>SOWER: Jesus</p><p>FINE SEED IS SOWN: Anointing with holy spirit</p><p>THE FIELD: The world of mankind</p><p>‘A man sowed fine seed in his field’ (Matt. 13:24)</p><p>ENEMY: The Devil</p><p>MEN WERE SLEEPING: Death of the apostles</p><p>‘While men were sleeping, the enemy oversowed weeds’ (Matt. 13:25)</p><p>WHEAT: Anointed Christians</p><p>WEEDS: Imitation Christians</p><p>“Both grow together until the harvest” (Matt. 13:30)</p><p>1914 HARVEST BEGINS</p><p>SLAVES/<wbr />REAPERS: Angels</p><p>Weedlike Christians are separated from the anointed “sons of the kingdom”</p><p>The weeds are collected and bundled (Matt. 13:30)</p><p>(See paragraphs 10, 11)</p><p>1919 GATHERING INTO THE STOREHOUSE: Anointed Christians are gathered into the restored congregation</p><p>HARVEST SEASON</p><p>‘Gathering the wheat into the storehouse’ (Matt. 13:30)</p><p>(See paragraph 12)</p><p>ARMAGEDDON</p><p>At Armageddon, the weeds are pitched into the fire</p><p>SHINING BRIGHTLY</p><p>Shortly before Armageddon, the remaining faithful anointed ones are gathered to the heavens</p><p>The righteous ones shine brightly in the Kingdom (Matt. 13:43) (See paragraphs 16, 17)</p><p>The weeds are pitched into the fiery furnace (Matt. 13:42) (See paragraph 15)</p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture]</strong></p><p><strong>[Picture on page 13]</strong></p><p>Christendom’s close association with political leaders will soon come to an end (See paragraph 13)</p><p></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
