<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text:  4 Jehovah Exalts His Name</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014243.xhtml#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 43:1-28)</strong> <span id="citation17"></span>Now this is what Jehovah says, Your Creator, O Jacob, the One who formed you, O Israel: “Do not be afraid, for I have repurchased you. I have called you by your name. You belong to me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>When you pass through the waters, I will be with you, And through the rivers, they will not flood over you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched, Nor will the flame singe you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For I am Jehovah your God, The Holy One of Israel, your Savior. I have given Egypt as a ransom for you, E·thi·oʹpi·a and Seʹba in exchange for you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For you became precious in my eyes, You were honored, and I have loved you. So I will give people in place of you And nations in exchange for your life.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bring your offspring* from the east And gather you together from the west.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’ And to the south, ‘Do not hold them back. Bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from the ends of the earth,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Everyone who is called by my name And whom I created for my own glory, Whom I have formed and made.’  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Bring out a people who are blind, though they have eyes, And who are deaf, though they have ears.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Let all the nations assemble in one place, And let the peoples be gathered together. Who among them can tell this? Or can they cause us to hear the first things?* Let them present their witnesses to prove themselves right, Or let them hear and say, ‘It is the truth!’” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>“You are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “Yes, my servant whom I have chosen, So that you may know and have faith in me* And understand that I am the same One. Before me no God was formed, And after me there has been none. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“I am the One who declared and saved and made known When there was no foreign god among you. So you are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “and I am God. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Also, I am always the same One; And no one can snatch anything out of my hand. When I act, who can prevent it?” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser, the Holy One of Israel: “For your sakes I will send to Babylon and bring down all the bars of the gates, And the Chal·deʹans, in their ships, will cry out in distress. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>This is what Jehovah says, The One making a way through the sea And a path even through turbulent waters, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The One who draws out the war chariot and the horse, The army together with the mighty warriors: “They will lie down and not get up. They will be extinguished, snuffed out like a burning wick.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>“Do not remember the former things, And do not dwell on the past. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Look! I am doing something new; Even now it is springing up. Do you not recognize it? I will make a way through the wilderness And rivers through the desert. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The wild beast of the field will honor me, The jackals and the ostriches, For I provide water in the wilderness, Rivers in the desert, For my people, my chosen one, to drink, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The people whom I formed for myself So that they might declare my praise. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>But you have not called on me, O Jacob, Because you grew weary of me, O Israel. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>You have not brought me sheep for your whole burnt offerings Or glorified me with your sacrifices. I have not compelled you to bring me a gift, Nor have I made you weary by demanding frankincense. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You did not buy me sweet cane* with your money, And with the fat of your sacrifices you did not satisfy me. Instead, you have burdened me with your sins And made me weary with your errors. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I, I am the One who is blotting out your transgressions* for my own sake, And I will not remember your sins. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Remind me; let us bring our case against each other; Tell your side of it to prove you are in the right. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Your first forefather sinned, And your own spokesmen* have rebelled against me. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>So I will profane the princes of the holy place, And I will give Jacob over to destruction And subject Israel to insulting words.</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Possibly referring to the first things to come in the future.</p><p>Or “and trust me.”</p><p>An aromatic reed.</p><p>Or “rebellious acts.”</p><p>Possibly referring to teachers of the Law.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014243.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***nwt pp. 1731-1735 A4 The Divine Name in the Hebrew Scriptures***</strong></a><br /><strong>A4</strong></p><p><strong>The Divine Name in the Hebrew Scriptures</strong></p><p>The divine name, represented by the four Hebrew consonants <span class="altsize">יהוה</span>, appears nearly 7,000 times in the Hebrew Scriptures. This translation renders those four letters, known as the Tetragrammaton, “Jehovah.” That name is by far the most frequently occurring name in the Bible. While the inspired writers refer to God by many titles and descriptive terms, such as “Almighty,” “Most High,” and “Lord,” the Tetragrammaton is the only personal name they use to identify God.</p><p>Jehovah God himself directed Bible writers to use his name. For example, he inspired the prophet Joel to write: “Everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.” (Joel 2:32) And God caused one psalmist to write: “May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” (Psalm 83:18) In fact, the divine name appears some 700 times in the book of Psalms alone—a book of poetic writings that were to be sung and recited by God’s people. Why, then, is God’s name missing from many Bible translations? Why does this translation use the form “Jehovah”? And what does the divine name, Jehovah, mean?</p><p><strong>Why is the name missing from many Bible translations? </strong>The reasons vary. Some feel that Almighty God does not need a unique name to identify him. Others appear to have been influenced by the Jewish tradition of avoiding the use of the name, perhaps out of fear of desecrating it. Still others believe that since no one can be sure of the exact pronunciation of God’s name, it is better just to use a title, such as “Lord” or “God.” Such objections, however, lack merit for the following reasons:</p><p>• Those who argue that Almighty God does not need a unique name ignore evidence that early copies of his Word, including those preserved from before the time of Christ, contain God’s personal name. As noted above, God directed that his name be included in his Word some 7,000 times. Obviously, he wants us to know and use his name.</p><p>• Translators who remove the name out of deference to Jewish tradition fail to recognize a key fact. While some Jewish scribes refused to pronounce the name, they did not remove it from their copies of the Bible. Ancient scrolls found in Qumran, near the Dead Sea, contain the name in many places. Some Bible translators hint that the divine name appeared in the original text by substituting the title “LORD” in capital letters. But the question remains, Why have these translators felt free to substitute or remove God’s name from the Bible when they acknowledge that it is found in the Bible text thousands of times? Who do they believe gave them authority to make such a change? Only they can say.</p><p>• Those who say that the divine name should not be used because it is not known exactly how to pronounce it will nevertheless freely use the name Jesus. However, Jesus’ first-century disciples said his name quite differently from the way most Christians do today. To Jewish Christians, the name Jesus was probably pronounced <em>Ye·shuʹa‛. </em>And the title “Christ” was <em>Ma·shiʹach, </em>or “Messiah.” Greek-speaking Christians called him <em>I·e·sousʹ Khri·stosʹ, </em>and Latin-speaking Christians <em>Ieʹsus Chriʹstus. </em>Under inspiration, the Greek translation of his name was recorded in the Bible, showing that first-century Christians followed the sensible course of using the form of the name common in their language. Similarly, the New World Bible Translation Committee feels that it is reasonable to use the form “Jehovah,” even though that rendering is not exactly the way the divine name would have been pronounced in ancient Hebrew.</p><p><strong>Why does the <em>New World Translation </em>use the form “Jehovah”? </strong>In English, the four letters of the Tetragrammaton (<span class="altsize">יהוה</span>) are represented by the consonants YHWH. As was true of all written words in ancient Hebrew, the Tetragrammaton contained no vowels. When ancient Hebrew was in everyday use, readers easily provided the appropriate vowels.</p><p>About a thousand years after the Hebrew Scriptures were completed, Jewish scholars developed a system of pronunciation points, or signs, by which to indicate what vowels to use when reading Hebrew. By that time, though, many Jews had the superstitious idea that it was wrong to say God’s personal name out loud, so they used substitute expressions. Thus, it seems that when they copied the Tetragrammaton, they combined the vowels for the <em>substitute expressions </em>with the four consonants representing the divine name. Therefore, the manuscripts with those vowel points do not help in determining how the name was originally pronounced in Hebrew. Some feel that the name was pronounced “Yahweh,” whereas others suggest different possibilities. A Dead Sea Scroll containing a portion of Leviticus in Greek transliterates the divine name <em>Iao. </em>Besides that form, early Greek writers also suggest the pronunciations <em>Iae, I·a·beʹ, </em>and <em>I·a·ou·eʹ. </em>However, there is no reason to be dogmatic. We simply do not know how God’s ancient servants pronounced this name in Hebrew. (Genesis 13:4; Exodus 3:15) What we do know is that God used his name repeatedly in communication with his people, that they addressed him by that name, and that they used it freely in speaking with others.—Exodus 6:2; 1 Kings 8:23; Psalm 99:9.</p><p>Why, then, does this translation use the form “Jehovah”? Because that form of the divine name has a long history in the English language.</p><p>The first rendering of God’s personal name in an English Bible appeared in 1530 in William Tyndale’s translation of the Pentateuch. He used the form “Iehouah.” Over time, the English language changed, and the spelling of the divine name was modernized. For example, in 1612, Henry Ainsworth used the form “Iehovah” throughout his translation of the book of Psalms. Then, in 1639, when that work was revised and printed with the Pentateuch, the form “Jehovah” was used. In 1901, the translators who produced the <em>American Standard Version </em>of the Bible used the form “Jehovah” where the divine name appeared in the Hebrew text.</p><p>Explaining why he used “Jehovah” instead of “Yahweh” in his 1911 work <em>Studies in the Psalms, </em>respected Bible scholar Joseph Bryant Rotherham said that he wanted to employ a “form of the name more familiar (while perfectly acceptable) to the general Bible-reading public.” In 1930 scholar A. F. Kirkpatrick made a similar point regarding the use of the form “Jehovah.” He said: “Modern grammarians argue that it ought to be read <em>Yahveh </em>or <em>Yahaveh; </em>but JEHOVAH seems firmly rooted in the English language, and the really important point is not the exact pronunciation, but the recognition that it is a Proper Name, not merely an appellative title like ‘Lord.’”</p><p><strong>What is the meaning of the name Jehovah? </strong>In Hebrew, the name Jehovah comes from a verb that means “to become,” and a number of scholars feel that it reflects the causative form of that Hebrew verb. Thus, the understanding of the New World Bible Translation Committee is that God’s name means “He Causes to Become.” Scholars hold varying views, so we cannot be dogmatic about this meaning. However, this definition well fits Jehovah’s role as the Creator of all things and the Fulfiller of his purpose. He not only caused the physical universe and intelligent beings to exist, but as events unfold, he continues to cause his will and purpose to be realized.</p><p>Therefore, the meaning of the name Jehovah is not limited to the related verb found at Exodus 3:14, which reads: “I Will Become What I Choose to Become” or, “I Will Prove to Be What I Will Prove to Be.” In the strictest sense, those words do not fully define God’s name. Rather, they reveal an aspect of God’s personality, showing that he becomes what is needed in each circumstance to fulfill his purpose. So while the name Jehovah may include this idea, it is not limited to what he himself chooses to become. It also includes what he causes to happen with regard to his creation and the accomplishment of his purpose.</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 1731]</strong></p><p>The divine name in the ancient Hebrew letters used before the Babylonian exile</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 1731]</strong></p><p>The divine name in the Hebrew letters used after the Babylonian exile</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 1732]</strong></p><p>Excerpts from the Psalms in a Dead Sea Scroll dated to the first half of the first century C.E. The text is in the style of the Hebrew letters commonly used after the Babylonian exile, but the Tetragrammaton appears repeatedly in distinctive ancient Hebrew letters</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 1734]</strong></p><p>God’s name at Genesis 15:2 in William Tyndale’s translation of the Pentateuch, 1530</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 1735]</strong></p><p>The Tetragrammaton, YHWH: “He Causes to Become”</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 1735]</strong></p><p>The verb HWH: “to become”</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
