<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 21 God’s Kingdom Removes Its Enemies</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="1102014263.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***ip-1 pp. 282-283 Jehovah’s Hand Becomes High***</strong></a><br />is still captive to Babylon. He compares the nation to a woman who is in labor but who without help is unable to give birth. <strong>(<em>Read Isaiah 26:17, 18.</em>) </strong>That help comes in 537 B.C.E., and Jehovah’s people return to their homeland, eager to rebuild the temple and restore true worship. In effect, the nation is raised from the dead. <strong><em>“Your dead ones will live. A corpse of mine—they will rise up. Awake and cry out joyfully, you residents in the dust! For your dew is as the dew of mallows, and the earth itself will let even those impotent in death drop in birth.” </em>(<em>Isaiah 26:19</em>) </strong>What a demonstration of Jehovah’s power! Further, what a great demonstration there was when these words were fulfilled in a spiritual sense in 1919! (Revelation 11:7-11) And how we look forward to the time when these words are fulfilled in a literal way in the new world and those impotent in death ‘hear Jesus’ voice and come out’ from the memorial tombs!—John 5:28, 29.</p><p><sup>24 </sup>However, if faithful ones are to enjoy the spiritual blessings promised through Isaiah, they must obey Jehovah’s commands: <strong><em>“Go, my people, enter into your interior rooms, and shut your doors behind you. Hide yourself for but a moment until the denunciation passes over. For, look! Jehovah is coming forth from his place to call to account the error of the inhabitant of the land against him, and the land will certainly expose her bloodshed and will no longer cover over her killed ones.” </em>(<em>Isaiah 26:20, 21; </em></strong>compare Zephaniah 1:14.) This passage may have an initial fulfillment when the Medes and the Persians, led by King Cyrus, conquer Babylon in 539 B.C.E. According to the Greek historian Xenophon, when Cyrus enters Babylon, he commands everyone to stay in their homes because his cavalry has “orders to cut down all whom they found out of doors.” Today, the “interior rooms” of this prophecy could be closely linked with the tens of thousands of congregations of Jehovah’s people around the world. Such congregations will continue to play a key role in our lives, even through “the great tribulation.” (Revelation 7:14) How vital that we maintain a wholesome attitude toward the congregation and regularly associate with it!—Hebrews 10:24, 25.</p><p><sup>25 </sup>Soon the end will come for Satan’s world. How Jehovah will protect his people during that fear-inspiring time, we do not yet know. (Zephaniah 2:3) However, we do know that our survival will depend on our faith in Jehovah and our loyalty and obedience to him.</p><p><sup>26 </sup>Looking toward that time, Isaiah prophesies: <strong><em>“In that day Jehovah, with his hard and great and strong sword, will turn his attention to Leviathan, the gliding serpent, even to Leviathan, the crooked serpent, and he will certainly kill the sea monster that is in the sea.” </em>(<em>Isaiah 27:1</em>) </strong>In the initial fulfillment, “Leviathan” refers to the countries to which Israel has been scattered, such as Babylon, Egypt, and Assyria. These countries will be unable to prevent the return of Jehovah’s people to their homeland at the proper time. Who, though, is the modern-day Leviathan? It appears to be Satan—“the original serpent”—and his wicked system of things here on earth, his tool for warring against spiritual Israel. (Revelation 12:9, 10; 13:14, 16, 17; 18:24) “Leviathan” lost his hold on God’s people in 1919, and soon he will disappear altogether when Jehovah will “certainly kill the sea monster.” Meantime, nothing</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
