<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text:  5 The King Shines Light on the Kingdom</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014244.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:1-17)</strong> <span id="citation7"></span>Then a great sign was seen in heaven: A woman was arrayed* with the sun, and the moon was beneath her feet, and on her head was a crown of 12 stars, <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>and she was pregnant. And she was crying out in her pains and in her agony to give birth. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Another sign was seen in heaven. Look! A great fiery-colored dragon, with seven heads and ten horns and on its heads seven diadems;* <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>and its tail drags a third of the stars of heaven, and it hurled them down to the earth. And the dragon kept standing before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she did give birth, it might devour her child. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>And she gave birth to a son, a male, who is to shepherd all the nations with an iron rod. And her child was snatched* away to God and to his throne. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God and where they would feed her for 1,260 days. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And war broke out in heaven: Miʹcha·el* and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>but they did not prevail,* nor was a place found for them any longer in heaven. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God! <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And they conquered him because of the blood of the Lamb and because of the word of their witnessing, and they did not love their souls* even in the face of death. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>On this account be glad, you heavens and you who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to you, having great anger, knowing that he has a short period of time.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Now when the dragon saw that it had been hurled down to the earth, it persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male child. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>But the two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, where she is to be fed for a time and times and half a time* away from the face of the serpent. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And the serpent spewed out water like a river from its mouth after the woman, to cause her to be drowned by the river. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But the earth came to the woman’s help, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river that the dragon spewed out from its mouth. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So the dragon became enraged at the woman and went off to wage war with the remaining ones of her offspring,* who observe the commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness concerning Jesus.</p><p></p><p>Or “clothed.”</p><p>Or “royal headbands.”</p><p>Or “caught.”</p><p>Meaning “Who Is Like God?”</p><p>Or possibly, “but it [that is, the dragon] was defeated.”</p><p>Or “lives.” See Glossary.</p><p>That is, three and a half times.</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="1102014244.xhtml#citationsource13">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 25:1-30)</strong> <span id="citation13"></span>“Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’ <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’ <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave five talents* to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’ <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Well, then, you should have deposited my money* with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p><p>A Greek talent equaled 20.4 kg (654 oz t). See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
