<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 September 26–October 2</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016330.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 142:0-150:6)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Masʹkil.* Of David when he was in the cave. A prayer. <strong>142 </strong>With my voice I call to Jehovah for help; With my voice I plead with Jehovah for favor.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before him I pour out my concern; Before him I tell about my distress  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When my spirit* fails within me. Then you watch my roadway. In the path where I walk, They hide a trap for me.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look at my right hand and see That no one cares about* me. There is nowhere I can flee; No one is concerned about me.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I call to you, O Jehovah, for help. I say: “You are my refuge, All I have* in the land of the living.”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Pay attention to my cry for help, For I have been brought very low. Rescue me from my persecutors, For they are stronger than I am.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Bring me* out of the dungeon To praise your name. May the righteous gather around me Because you deal kindly with me. </p><p>A melody of David. <strong>143 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Listen to my plea for help. In your faithfulness and in your righteousness, answer me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not enter into judgment with your servant, For no one living can be righteous before you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the enemy pursues me;* He has crushed my life into the ground. He has caused me to dwell in darkness like those long dead.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My spirit* is failing; My heart is numb within me.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I remember the days of old; I meditate on all your activity; I eagerly ponder over* the work of your hands.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I spread out my hands to you; I am* like a parched land that thirsts for you. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do answer me quickly, O Jehovah; My strength* has come to an end. Do not hide your face from me, Or I will be like those going down into the pit.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let me hear your loyal love in the morning, For I trust in you. Make known to me the way I should walk, For to you I turn.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Rescue me from my enemies, O Jehovah. I seek your protection. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Teach me to do your will, For you are my God. Your spirit is good; May it lead me on level ground.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For the sake of your name, O Jehovah, preserve me alive. In your righteousness, rescue me* from distress. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In your loyal love, put an end to* my enemies; Destroy all those harassing me,* For I am your servant. </p><p>Of David. <strong>144 </strong>May Jehovah, my Rock, be praised, Who trains my hands for battle, My fingers for warfare.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He is my loyal love and my stronghold, My secure refuge* and my rescuer, My shield and the One in whom I have taken shelter, The One subduing peoples under me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, what is man that you should notice him, The son of mortal man that you should pay attention to him?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Man resembles a mere breath; His days are like a passing shadow.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, lower* your heavens and descend; Touch the mountains and make them smoke.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Make lightning flash and scatter the enemy; Shoot your arrows and throw them into confusion.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Stretch out your hands from above; Rescue me and save me from the surging waters, From the hand* of the foreigners,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whose mouths speak lies And who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>O God, I will sing to you a new song. I will sing praises* to you, accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>To the One who gives victory* to kings, The One rescuing his servant David from the deadly sword. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Rescue me and save me from the hand of the foreigners, Whose mouths speak lies And who raise their right hand to swear to what is false. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then our sons will be like young plants that grow up quickly, Our daughters like corner pillars carved for a palace. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Our storehouses will overflow with every kind of produce; Our flocks in our fields will multiply by the thousands, by the tens of thousands. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Our cattle, heavy with young, will suffer no mishap* or miscarriage; There will be no cry of distress in our public squares. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Happy is the people for whom it is this way! Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah! </p><p>A praise of David. <strong>145 </strong>I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever. </p><p><strong>146 </strong>Praise Jah!* Let my whole being* praise Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will praise Jehovah all my life. I will sing praises* to my God as long as I live.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not put your trust in princes* Nor in a son of man, who cannot bring salvation.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>His spirit* goes out, he returns to the ground; On that very day his thoughts perish.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob as his helper, Whose hope is in Jehovah his God,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The Maker of heaven and earth, Of the sea, and of all that is in them, The One who always remains faithful,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The One securing justice for those defrauded, The One giving bread to the hungry. Jehovah is releasing the prisoners.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is opening the eyes of the blind; Jehovah is raising up those bowed down; Jehovah loves the righteous.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is protecting the foreign residents; He sustains the fatherless child and the widow, But he thwarts the plans of the wicked.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Jehovah will be King forever, Your God, O Zion, for generation after generation. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>147 </strong>Praise Jah!* It is good to sing praises* to our God; How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah is building Jerusalem; He gathers together the dispersed ones of Israel.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He heals the brokenhearted; He binds up their wounds.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He counts the number of the stars; He calls all of them by name.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Our Lord is great and is mighty in power; His understanding is beyond measure.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah raises up the meek, But he hurls the wicked to the ground.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving; Sing praises to our God, accompanied by the harp,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The One who covers the heavens with clouds, The One providing rain for the earth, The One making grass sprout on the mountains.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>To the animals he gives food, To the young ravens that call out for it. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He does not delight in the power of the horse; Nor is he impressed by the strong legs of a man. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah finds pleasure in those who fear him, In those waiting for his loyal love. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Glorify Jehovah, O Jerusalem. Praise your God, O Zion. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He makes the bars of your city gates strong; He blesses your sons within you. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He brings peace to your territory; He satisfies you with the finest* wheat. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He sends his command to the earth; His word runs swiftly. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He sends the snow like wool; He scatters the frost just like ashes. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He hurls down his hailstones* like morsels of bread. Who can withstand his cold? <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He sends out his word, and they melt. He makes his wind blow, and the waters flow. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He declares his word to Jacob, His regulations and judgments to Israel. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He has not done so with any other nation; They know nothing about his judgments. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>148 </strong>Praise Jah!* Praise Jehovah from the heavens; Praise him in the heights.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Praise him, all his angels. Praise him, all his army.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Praise him, sun and moon. Praise him, all shining stars.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Praise him, O highest heavens* And waters above the heavens.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let them praise the name of Jehovah, For he commanded, and they were created.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He keeps them established forever and ever; He has issued a decree that will not pass away.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah from the earth, You great sea creatures and all deep waters,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You lightning and hail, snow and thick clouds, You storm wind, carrying out his word,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You mountains and all you hills, You fruit trees and all you cedars, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You wild animals and all you domestic animals, You creeping things and winged birds, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You kings of the earth and all you nations, You princes and all you judges of the earth, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You young men and young women,* Old men and young together.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Let them praise the name of Jehovah, For his name alone is unreachably high. His majesty is above earth and heaven. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He will exalt the strength* of his people, For the praise of all his loyal ones, Of the sons of Israel, the people close to him. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>149 </strong>Praise Jah!* Sing to Jehovah a new song; Praise him in the congregation of the loyal ones.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let Israel rejoice in its Grand Maker; Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let them praise his name with dancing And sing praises* to him, accompanied by the tambourine and the harp.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people. He adorns the meek with salvation.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let the loyal ones exult in glory; Let them shout for joy upon their beds.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Let the songs praising God be in their throat, And a two-edged sword be in their hand,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>To execute vengeance on the nations And punishment on the peoples,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>To bind their kings with shackles And their nobles with iron fetters,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>To execute the judgment written against them. This honor belongs to all his loyal ones. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>150 </strong>Praise Jah!* Praise God in his holy place. Praise him in the expanse of* his strength.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Praise him for his mighty works. Praise him for his exceeding greatness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Praise him with the sounding of the horn. Praise him with the stringed instrument and the harp.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Praise him with the tambourine and the circle dance. Praise him with strings and the flute.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Praise him with ringing cymbals. Praise him with crashing cymbals.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah. Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “strength.”</p><p>Lit., “recognizes.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “My share.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “strength.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “spirit.”</p><p>Or “grave.”</p><p>Or “For I lift up my soul to you.”</p><p>Or “in the land of uprightness.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “silence.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Or “bend.”</p><p>Or “grip.”</p><p>Lit., “And their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “salvation.”</p><p>Or “rupture.”</p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “nobles.”</p><p>Or “breath.”</p><p>Lit., “bound ones.”</p><p>Or “makes the way of the wicked crooked.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Lit., “the fat of.”</p><p>Or “ice.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “heavens of the heavens.”</p><p>Lit., “virgins.”</p><p>Or “Old and young together.”</p><p>Lit., “the horn.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “the sky that bears witness to.”</p><p>Or “pipe.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016330.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:1-21)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 134 See Yourself When All Is New***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 134</p>
<h1><strong>See Yourself When All Is New</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Revelation 21:1-5</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Just see yourself, just see me too;</p>
<p class="p5">Just see us all in a world that is new.</p>
<p class="p6">Think how you’ll feel, how it will be,</p>
<p class="p7">To live in peace, to be truly free.</p>
<p class="p8">No evil one will then prevail;</p>
<p class="p9">Rule by our God cannot ever fail.</p>
<p class="p10">The time will have come for a new earthly start,</p>
<p class="p11">The song of our praises will pour out from our heart:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">“Jehovah our God, how well you have done!</p>
<p class="p14">All things are new by the rule of your Son.</p>
<p class="p15">The fullness of our heart overflows in our song;</p>
<p class="p16">All glory and honor and praise to you belong.”</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. Now see yourself, and see me too;</p>
<p class="p18">And look ahead to a world that is new.</p>
<p class="p19">No sight we see, no sound we hear</p>
<p class="p20">Will cause alarm or give rise to fear.</p>
<p class="p21">All has come true, just as he said;</p>
<p class="p22">Now over mankind, his tent is spread.</p>
<p class="p23">He now shall awaken those sleeping in death;</p>
<p class="p24">Their voices will join us with ev’ry grateful breath:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p25">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p26">“Jehovah our God, how well you have done!</p>
<p class="p27">All things are new by the rule of your Son.</p>
<p class="p28">The fullness of our heart overflows in our song;</p>
<p class="p29">All glory and honor and praise to you belong.”</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p30">(See also <span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Ps. 37:10, 11;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> Isa. 65:17;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> John 5:28;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> 2 Pet. 3:13</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Rev. 21:1-5)</strong></a> And I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away, and the sea is no more. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I also saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God and prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>With that I heard a loud voice from the throne say: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his people. And God himself will be with them. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>And the One seated on the throne said: “Look! I am making all things new.” Also he says: “Write, for these words are faithful* and true.”</p><p></p><p>Or “trustworthy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 37:10, 11)</strong></a> Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more; You will look at where they were, And they will not be there. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the meek will possess the earth, And they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Isa. 65:17)</strong></a> For look! I am creating new heavens and a new earth; And the former things will not be called to mind,* Nor will they come up into the heart.</p><p></p><p>Or “be remembered.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(John 5:28)</strong></a> Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 3:13)</strong></a> But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w04 1/15 pp. 10-11 Jehovah’s Greatness Is Unsearchable***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>‘I Will Exalt God the King’</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 3. (a) What view did David have of Israel’s kingship? (b) To what extent did David desire to praise Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>3 </sup>Although David was God’s appointed king, he viewed Jehovah as the true King of Israel. Said David: “Yours is the kingdom, O Jehovah, the One also lifting yourself up as head over all.” (<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">1 Chronicles 29:11</a>) And how David appreciated God as Ruler! “I will exalt you, O my God the King,” he sang, “and I will bless your name to time indefinite, even forever. All day long I will bless you, and I will praise your name to time indefinite, even forever.” (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Psalm 145:1, 2</a>) It was David’s desire to praise Jehovah God throughout the day and for all eternity.</p>
<p class="qu"> 4. <span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Psalm 145</a> exposes what false claims?</p>
<p class="p7"><sup>4 </sup><span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Psalm 145</a> is a powerful answer to Satan’s claim that God is a selfish ruler who withholds freedom from his creatures. (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Genesis 3:1-5</a>) This psalm also exposes Satan’s lie that those who obey God do so only for what they can get out of it, not because they love God. (<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Job 1:9-11;</a><span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21"> 2:4, 5</a>) Like David, true Christians today are supplying an answer to the Devil’s false charges. They treasure their hope of everlasting life under Kingdom rule because they desire to praise Jehovah throughout eternity. Already, millions have started to do so by exercising faith in Jesus’ ransom sacrifice and by serving Jehovah obediently out of love as his dedicated, baptized worshipers.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Romans 5:8;</a><span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23"> 1 John 5:3</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(1 Chron. 29:11)</strong> Yours, O Jehovah, are the greatness and the mightiness and the beauty and the splendor and the majesty,* for everything in the heavens and on the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O Jehovah. You are the One exalting yourself as head over all.</p><p></p><p>Or “dignity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:1, 2)</strong> I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:0-21)</strong></a> A praise of David. <strong>145 </strong>I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:0-21)</strong> A praise of David. <strong>145 </strong>I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:1-5)</strong> Now the serpent was the most cautious* of all the wild animals of the field that Jehovah God had made. So it said to the woman: “Did God really say that you must not eat from every tree of the garden?” <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At this the woman said to the serpent: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>But God has said about the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden: ‘You must not eat from it, no, you must not touch it; otherwise you will die.’” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>At this the serpent said to the woman: “You certainly will not die. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For God knows that in the very day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and bad.”</p><p></p><p>Or “shrewdest; craftiest.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Job 1:9-11)</strong> At that Satan answered Jehovah: “Is it for nothing that Job has feared God? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Have you not put up a protective hedge around him and his house and everything he has? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his livestock has spread out in the land. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Job 2:4, 5)</strong> But Satan answered Jehovah: “Skin for skin. A man will give everything that he has for his life.* <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike his bone and flesh, and he will surely curse you to your very face.”</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 5:8)</strong> But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(1 John 5:3)</strong> For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w04 1/15 p. 11 Jehovah’s Greatness Is Unsearchable***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p10"><strong>Examples of God’s Greatness</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 7. Give a major reason to praise Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p11"><sup>7 </sup><span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Psalm 145:3</a> gives a major reason for praising Jehovah. David sings: “Jehovah is great and very much to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable.” Jehovah’s greatness is without limits. It cannot be fully searched out, comprehended, or measured by humans. But we will certainly benefit from now considering examples of Jehovah’s unsearchable greatness.</p>
<p class="qu"> 8. What does the universe reveal as to Jehovah’s greatness and power?</p>
<p class="p12"><sup>8 </sup>Try to recall an occasion when you were away from bright city lights and looked up into a cloudless night sky. Were you not amazed at the multitude of stars visible against the blackness of space? Were you not moved to praise Jehovah for his greatness in creating all those celestial bodies? What you saw, however, was but a tiny fraction of the number of stars in the galaxy of which the earth is a part. In addition, there are estimated to be more than a hundred billion galaxies, only three of which can be seen without the aid of a telescope. Indeed, the countless stars and galaxies that make up the immense universe are a testimony to Jehovah’s creative power and unsearchable greatness.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Isaiah 40:26</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:3)</strong> Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*</p><p></p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 40:26)</strong> “Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number; He calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, Not one of them is missing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w04 1/15 pp. 14-15 Jehovah’s Greatness Is Unsearchable***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p26"><strong>How Great God’s Moral Qualities!</strong></p>
<p class="qu">20, 21. (a) <span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Psalm 145:7-9</a> magnifies Jehovah’s greatness in connection with what qualities? (b) What effect do God’s qualities mentioned here have on all who love him?</p>
<p class="p27"><sup>20 </sup>As we have noted, the first six verses of <span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Psalm 145:1-6</a> give us sound reasons to praise Jehovah for things associated with his unsearchable greatness. <span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Ps 145 Verses 7 to 9</a> magnify God’s greatness by referring to his moral qualities. David sings: “With the mention of the abundance of your goodness they will bubble over, and because of your righteousness they will cry out joyfully. Jehovah is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and great in loving-kindness. Jehovah is good to all, and his mercies are over all his works.”</p>
<p class="p28"><sup>21 </sup>Here David first highlights Jehovah’s goodness and righteousness<wbr />—qualities called into question by Satan the Devil. What effect do these qualities have on all who love God and submit to his rulership? Why, Jehovah’s goodness and his righteous way of ruling bring such joy to his worshipers that they cannot stop bubbling forth his praise. Moreover, Jehovah’s goodness extends “to all.” Hopefully, this will help many more to repent and become worshipers of the true God before it is too late.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Acts 14:15-17</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:7-9)</strong></a> They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works.</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:1-6)</strong> I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.</p><p></p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:7-9)</strong> They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works.</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Acts 14:15-17)</strong> “Men, why are you doing these things? We too are humans having the same infirmities as you have. And we are declaring the good news to you, for you to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>In past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>although he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and filling your hearts with gladness.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w04 1/15 pp. 15-16 Jehovah Is Great in Loyal Love***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 2. What special aspect of love does Jehovah show for those who are in a dedicated relationship with him?</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>Jehovah shows love for his true worshipers in a precious, lasting way. Such love is denoted by a Hebrew word translated “loving-kindness,” or “loyal love.” King David of ancient Israel deeply appreciated God’s loving-kindness. Because of his personal experience and his meditation on God’s dealings with others, David could confidently sing: “Jehovah is . . . great in loving-kindness [or, “loyal love”].”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Psalm 145:8</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:8)</strong> Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w04 1/15 p. 16 Jehovah Is Great in Loyal Love***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Identifying God’s Loyal Ones</strong></p>
<p class="qu">3, 4. (a) How does <span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Psalm 145</a> help us to identify Jehovah’s loyal ones? (b) How do God’s loyal ones “bless” him?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>3 </sup>Regarding Jehovah God, the prophet Samuel’s mother, Hannah, said: “The feet of his loyal ones he guards.” (<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">1 Samuel 2:9</a>) Who are such “loyal ones”? King David supplies the answer. After extolling Jehovah’s marvelous qualities, he states: “Your loyal ones will bless you.” (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Psalm 145:10</a>) You may wonder how humans can bless God. They do so primarily by praising him or by speaking well of him.</p>
<p class="p7"><sup>4 </sup>Jehovah’s loyal ones can be identified as those who use their mouths to speak well of him. In social settings and at Christian meetings, what is a common theme of their discussions? Why, it is Jehovah’s Kingdom! God’s loyal servants share the sentiments of David, who sang: “About the glory of your [Jehovah’s] kingship they will talk, and about your mightiness they will speak.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Psalm 145:11</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 5. How do we know that Jehovah takes note when his loyal ones speak well of him?</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>Does Jehovah take note when his loyal ones praise him? Yes, he pays attention to what they say. In a prophecy relating to true worship in our day, Malachi wrote: “At that time those in fear of Jehovah spoke with one another, each one with his companion, and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening. And a book of remembrance began to be written up before him for those in fear of Jehovah and for those thinking upon his name.” (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Malachi 3:16</a>) It pleases Jehovah very much when his loyal ones speak well of him, and he remembers them.</p>
<p class="qu"> 6. What activity helps us to identify God’s loyal ones?</p>
<p class="p9"><sup>6 </sup>Jehovah’s loyal servants can also be identified by their courage and initiative in speaking to people who are not worshipers of the true God. Indeed, God’s loyal ones “make known to the sons of men his mighty acts and the glory of the splendor of his kingship.” (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Psalm 145:12</a>) Do you seek and take full advantage of opportunities to speak to strangers about Jehovah’s kingship? Unlike human governments, which will soon pass away, his kingship is eternal. (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">1 Timothy 1:17</a>) It is urgent that people learn about Jehovah’s everlasting kingship and take their stand as its supporters. “Your kingship is a kingship for all times indefinite,” sang David, “and your dominion is throughout all successive generations.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Psalm 145:13</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:0-21)</strong></a> A praise of David. <strong>145 </strong>I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(1 Sam. 2:9)</strong> He guards the steps of his loyal ones, But the wicked will be silenced in darkness, For not by power does a man prevail.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:10)</strong> All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:11)</strong> They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:16)</strong> At that time those who fear Jehovah spoke with one another, each one with his companion, and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening. And a book of remembrance was written before him for those fearing Jehovah and for those meditating on* his name.</p><p></p><p>Or “thinking on.” Or possibly, “treasuring.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:12)</strong> To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 1:17)</strong> Now to the King of eternity, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:13)</strong> Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w04 1/15 pp. 17-18 Jehovah Is Great in Loyal Love***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p14"><sup>10 </sup>Of course, some human rulers are sincerely concerned about the welfare of their subjects. But even the most noble among them do not know their subjects intimately. Indeed, we may ask: Is there any ruler who cares for <em>all </em>his subjects so much that he quickly comes to the aid of each one in times of trouble? Yes, there is. David wrote: “Jehovah is giving support to all who are falling, and is raising up all who are bowed down.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Psalm 145:14</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">11. What trials befall God’s loyal ones, and what help do they have?</p>
<p class="p15"><sup>11 </sup>Many trials and calamities befall Jehovah God’s loyal ones because of their own imperfection and because they live in a world that is lying in the power of Satan, “the wicked one.” (<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">1 John 5:19;</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> Psalm 34:19</a>) Christians experience persecution. Some suffer from chronic illness or because of bereavement. At times, the mistakes of Jehovah’s loyal ones may cause them to ‘bow down’ in discouragement. Whatever trial befalls them, however, Jehovah is always ready to give comfort and spiritual strength to each one of them. The King Jesus Christ has the same loving interest in his loyal subjects.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Psalm 72:12-14</a>.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Satisfying Food in Season</strong></p>
<p class="qu">12, 13. How well does Jehovah provide for the needs of “every living thing”?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>12 </sup>Out of his great loving-kindness, Jehovah provides for all the needs of his servants. This includes satisfying them with nourishing food. King David wrote: “To you [Jehovah] the eyes of all look hopefully, and you are giving them their food in its season. You are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing.” (<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Psalm 145:15, 16</a>) Even in times of calamity, Jehovah can maneuver matters so that his loyal ones get “bread for the day.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Luke 11:3;</a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> 12:29, 30</a>.</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>13 </sup>David mentioned that “every living thing” gets satisfied. That includes the animals. If it were not for earth’s abundant vegetation of the land and plants of the sea, aquatic creatures, birds, and land animals would have no oxygen to breathe or food to eat. (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Psalm 104:14</a>) However, Jehovah sees to it that all their needs are satisfied.</p>
<p class="qu">14, 15. How is spiritual food being provided today?</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>14 </sup>Unlike animals, humans have a spiritual need. (<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Matthew 5:3</a>) How wonderfully Jehovah satisfies the spiritual needs of his loyal ones! Before his death, Jesus promised that “the faithful and discreet slave” would provide Jesus’ followers with spiritual “food at the proper time.” (<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Matthew 24:45</a>) The remnant of the 144,000 anointed ones make up that slave class today. Through them, Jehovah has indeed provided spiritual food in abundance.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:14)</strong> Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(1 John 5:19)</strong> We know that we originate with God, but the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 34:19)</strong> Many are the hardships* of the righteous one, But Jehovah rescues him from them all.</p><p></p><p>Or “calamities.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:12-14)</strong> For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:15, 16)</strong> All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Luke 11:3)</strong> Give us each day our bread according to our daily needs.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Luke 12:29, 30)</strong> So stop seeking what you will eat and what you will drink, and stop being in anxious suspense; <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>for all these are the things the nations of the world are eagerly pursuing, but your Father knows you need these things.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 104:14)</strong> He is making grass grow for the cattle And vegetation for mankind’s use, To grow food from the land</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 5:3)</strong> “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need,* since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.</p><p></p><p>Or “those who are beggars for the spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w10 1/15 p. 21 Use Each Day of Your Life for God’s Glory***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p2">“IN THE morning cause me to hear your loving-kindness,” prayed the psalmist David to Jehovah. “Make known to me the way in which I should walk.” (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Ps. 143:8</a>) When you wake up and thank Jehovah for a new day of life, do you, like David, entreat Jehovah to guide you in making decisions and taking the best course of action? No doubt you do.</p>
<p class="p3">As dedicated servants of Jehovah, “whether [we] are eating or drinking or doing anything else,” we strive to “do all things for God’s glory.” (<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">1 Cor. 10:31</a>) We realize that the way we live our daily life will either honor or dishonor Jehovah. We also remember that God’s Word states that Satan is accusing Christ’s brothers<wbr />—and, in fact, all of God’s servants on earth—<wbr />“day and night.” (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Rev. 12:10</a>) Therefore, we are determined to give a reply to Satan’s false accusations and to make Jehovah’s heart rejoice by rendering sacred service to our heavenly Father “day and night.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Rev. 7:15;</a><span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53"> Prov. 27:11</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Ps. 143:8)</strong></a> Let me hear your loyal love in the morning, For I trust in you. Make known to me the way I should walk, For to you I turn.*</p><p></p><p>Or “For I lift up my soul to you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 10:31)</strong></a> Therefore, whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Rev. 12:10)</strong></a> I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the Kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(Rev. 7:15)</strong></a> That is why they are before the throne of God, and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple; and the One seated on the throne will spread his tent over them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong></a> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***it-2 p. 448 Mouth***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>MOUTH</strong></p>
<p class="p2">An organ designed by God to receive and prepare food for the stomach, also, in humans, for speaking. All speech should result in praise to Him. (<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Ps 34:1;</a><span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55"> 51:15;</a><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"> 71:8;</a><span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57"> 145:21</a>) The psalmist declared that everything that has breath will praise Jehovah; therefore humans must use their mouths to do this if they desire to live. The apostle Paul explains that belief in God and his Son, even believing with the heart, is not enough. It has to be accompanied by public declaration in order to bring salvation.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Ps 150:6;</a><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"> Ro 10:10</a>.</p>
<p class="p3">In harmony with his purpose and his right and power as Creator, Jehovah can put the proper words into the mouth of his servant. In the case of his prophets, he did so miraculously, by inspiration. (<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Ex 4:11, 12,</a><span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61"> 15;</a><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62"> Jer 1:9</a>) In one instance he caused even a dumb animal, an ass, to speak. (<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Nu 22:28,</a><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"> 30;</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> 2Pe 2:15, 16</a>) Today God’s servants can have his words in their mouths, not by inspiration, but from his inspired written Word, which equips them completely for every good work. (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">2Ti 3:16, 17</a>) They no longer have to wait for Christ to come to provide the good news, nor do they need to go to some other source for what they preach. They have it right before them, ready for them to speak, as they are told: “The word is near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Ro 10:6-9;</a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> De 30:11-14</a>.</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>Can Bring Life or Death. </strong>It follows that the proper use of the mouth is vital, and so Jehovah declares it to be. His Word says: “The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life.” (<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Pr 10:11</a>) The mouth, therefore, has to be guarded most carefully (<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">Ps 141:3;</a><span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71"> Pr 13:3;</a><span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"> 21:23</a>), for stupid misuse of it can bring its owner to ruin. (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Pr 10:14;</a><span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74"> 18:7</a>) God holds a person accountable for what he brings forth from his mouth. (<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Mt 12:36, 37</a>) A person may speak hastily, making a rash vow. (<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Ec 5:4-6</a>) He may flatter another, to that person’s overthrow and his own condemnation. (<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Pr 26:28</a>) It is especially important to guard one’s mouth when before the wicked, because a slight deviation from what God’s wisdom directs his servant to say can bring reproach on God’s name and may cause that one’s death. (<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Ps 39:1</a>) Jesus gave a fine example of submissiveness to God’s will without complaint or any reviling of his wicked opposers.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Isa 53:7;</a><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"> Ac 8:32;</a><span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81"> 1Pe 2:23</a>.</p>
<p class="p5">The Christian must exercise constant vigilance, for he is imperfect; therefore he needs to watch his heart. Jesus said that it is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a man, but what comes forth from the mouth, for “out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Mt 12:34;</a><span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83"> 15:11</a>) Thus one must be careful not to let anything come forth from the mouth without thought, without considering the consequences. This requires that the person use his mind to apply the good things learned from God’s Word.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">Pr 13:3;</a><span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85"> 21:23</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <strong>(Ps. 34:1)</strong></a> I will praise Jehovah at all times; His praise will be on my lips constantly.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(Ps. 51:15)</strong></a> O Jehovah, open my lips, So that my mouth may declare your praise.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Ps. 71:8)</strong></a> My mouth is filled with your praise; All day long I tell about your splendor.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:21)</strong></a> My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Ps. 150:6)</strong></a> Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah. Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Rom. 10:10)</strong></a> For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Ex. 4:11, 12)</strong></a> Jehovah said to him: “Who made a mouth for man, or who makes them speechless, deaf, clear-sighted, or blind? Is it not I, Jehovah? <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So go now, and I will be with you as you speak,* and I will teach you what you should say.”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “with your mouth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Ex. 4:15)</strong></a> So you must speak to him and put the words in his mouth, and I will be with you and him as you speak, and I will teach you men what to do.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Jer. 1:9)</strong></a> Then Jehovah stretched out his hand and touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me: “I have put my words in your mouth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Num. 22:28)</strong></a> Finally Jehovah caused the donkey to speak,* and it said to Baʹlaam: “What have I done to you to make you beat me these three times?”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “opened the mouth of the female donkey.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Num. 22:30)</strong></a> Then the donkey said to Baʹlaam: “Am I not your donkey that you have ridden on all your life until today? Have I ever treated you this way before?” He replied: “No!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 2:15, 16)</strong></a> Abandoning the straight path, they have been led astray. They have followed the path of Baʹlaam the son of Beʹor, who loved the reward of wrongdoing, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>but was reproved for his own violation of what was right. A voiceless beast of burden speaking with a human voice hindered the prophet’s mad course.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16, 17)</strong></a> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Rom. 10:6-9)</strong></a> But the righteousness resulting from faith says: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ that is, to bring Christ down, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.” <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart”; that is, “the word” of faith, which we are preaching. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For if you publicly declare with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and exercise faith in your heart that God raised him up from the dead, you will be saved.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Deut. 30:11-14)</strong></a> “Now this commandment that I am commanding you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it beyond your reach.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>It is not in the heavens, so that you have to say, ‘Who will ascend to the heavens and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Nor is it on the other side of the sea, so that you have to say, ‘Who will cross over to the other side of the sea and get it for us, so that we may hear it and observe it?’ <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For the word is very near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart, so that you may do it.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “nor is it far away.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Prov. 10:11)</strong></a> The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(Ps. 141:3)</strong></a> Station a guard for my mouth, O Jehovah, Do set a watch over the door of my lips.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Prov. 13:3)</strong></a> The one guarding his mouth* protects his life,* But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin.</p><p></p><p>Or “what he says.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Prov. 21:23)</strong></a> The one guarding his mouth and his tongue Keeps himself* out of trouble.</p><p></p><p>Or “his soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(Prov. 10:14)</strong></a> Those who are wise treasure up knowledge, But the mouth of the fool invites ruin.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(Prov. 18:7)</strong></a> The mouth of the stupid is his ruin, And his lips are a snare for his life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(Matt. 12:36, 37)</strong></a> I tell you that men will render an account on Judgment Day for every unprofitable saying that they speak; <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>for by your words you will be declared righteous, and by your words you will be condemned.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <strong>(Eccl. 5:4-6)</strong></a> Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not allow your mouth to cause you* to sin, and do not say before the angel* that it was a mistake. Why make the true God indignant over what you say so that he has to destroy the work of your hands?</p><p></p><p>Lit., “your flesh.”</p><p>Or “messenger.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(Prov. 26:28)</strong></a> A lying tongue hates those crushed by it, And a flattering mouth causes ruin.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(Ps. 39:1)</strong></a> I said: “I will guard my step To avoid sinning with my tongue. I will guard my mouth with a muzzle As long as anyone wicked is in my presence.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Isa. 53:7)</strong></a> He was oppressed and he let himself be afflicted, But he would not open his mouth. He was brought like a sheep to the slaughter, Like a ewe that is silent before its shearers, And he would not open his mouth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(Acts 8:32)</strong></a> Now this was the passage of Scripture that he was reading: “Like a sheep he was brought to the slaughter, and like a lamb that is silent before its shearer, so he does not open his mouth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:23)</strong></a> When he was being insulted,* he did not insult* in return. When he was suffering, he did not threaten, but he entrusted himself to the One who judges righteously.</p><p></p><p>Or “reviled.”</p><p>Or “revile.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Matt. 12:34)</strong></a> Offspring of vipers, how can you speak good things when you are wicked? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <strong>(Matt. 15:11)</strong></a> It is not what enters into a man’s mouth that defiles him, but it is what comes out of his mouth that defiles him.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <strong>(Prov. 13:3)</strong></a> The one guarding his mouth* protects his life,* But the one opening his lips wide will come to ruin.</p><p></p><p>Or “what he says.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <strong>(Prov. 21:23)</strong></a> The one guarding his mouth and his tongue Keeps himself* out of trouble.</p><p></p><p>Or “his soul.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***fg lesson 9***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p7">Jehovah created men and women to fill complementary roles in marriage. (<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Genesis 2:18</a>) As family head, a husband should take the lead in providing materially for his family and in teaching them about God. He should be self-sacrificing in his love for his wife. Husbands and wives should love and respect each other. Since all husbands and wives are imperfect, learning to forgive is a key to happiness in marriage.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87"><em>Ephesians 4:31, 32;</em></a><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"> <em>5:22-25,</em></a><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"> <em>33;</em></a><span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90"> <em>1 Peter 3:7</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 2:18)</strong> Then Jehovah God said: “It is not good for the man to continue to be alone. I am going to make a helper for him, as a complement of him.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 4:31, 32)</strong> Put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech, as well as everything injurious. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another just as God also by Christ freely forgave you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 5:22-25)</strong> Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>because a husband is head of his wife just as the Christ is head of the congregation, he being a savior of this body. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>In fact, as the congregation is in subjection to the Christ, wives should also be to their husbands in everything. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 5:33)</strong> Nevertheless, each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 3:7)</strong> You husbands, in the same way, continue dwelling with them according to knowledge.* Assign them honor as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one, since they are also heirs with you of the undeserved favor of life, in order for your prayers not to be hindered.</p><p></p><p>Or “showing them consideration; understanding them.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***sn song 99 Praising Earth’s New King***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 99</p>
<h1><strong>Praising Earth’s New King</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91">Revelation 7:9</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. A multitude is gathering</p>
<p class="p5">from ev’ry tribe and nation,</p>
<p class="p6">Collected by the Christ and his</p>
<p class="p7">anointed congregation.</p>
<p class="p8">God’s Kingdom has been brought to birth;</p>
<p class="p9">His will shall soon be done on earth.</p>
<p class="p10">This hope is a gift of priceless worth,</p>
<p class="p11">giving joy and consolation.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">Praise our God, Jehovah;</p>
<p class="p14">Praise his Son, Christ Jesus,</p>
<p class="p15">Who through the ransom have set us free.</p>
<p class="p16">Now we have the hope to live on the earth</p>
<p class="p17">And serve God eternally.</p>
</div>
<p class="p18">2. We hail the Christ, our reigning King,</p>
<p class="p19">with sounds of jubilation.</p>
<p class="p20">This Prince of Peace shall do God’s will</p>
<p class="p21">and bring about salvation.</p>
<p class="p22">We see the joys that lie ahead:</p>
<p class="p23">An earth released from fear and dread,</p>
<p class="p24">The grand resurrection of the dead.</p>
<p class="p25">What a time for exultation!</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p26">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p27">Praise our God, Jehovah;</p>
<p class="p28">Praise his Son, Christ Jesus,</p>
<p class="p29">Who through the ransom have set us free.</p>
<p class="p30">Now we have the hope to live on the earth</p>
<p class="p31">And serve God eternally.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p32">(See also <span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92">Ps. 2:6;</a><span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93"> 45:1;</a><span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94"> Isa. 9:6;</a><span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95"> John 6:40</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <strong>(Rev. 7:9)</strong></a> After this I saw, and look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues,* standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes; and there were palm branches in their hands.</p><p></p><p>Or “languages.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <strong>(Ps. 2:6)</strong></a> Saying: “I myself have installed my king On Zion, my holy mountain.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <strong>(Ps. 45:1)</strong></a> My heart is stirred by something good. I say: “My song is* about a king.” May my tongue be the stylus* of a skilled copyist.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “My works are.”</p><p>Or “pen.”</p><p>Or “scribe.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <strong>(Isa. 9:6)</strong></a> For a child has been born to us, A son has been given to us; And the rulership* will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.</p><p></p><p>Or “government; princely rule.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <strong>(John 6:40)</strong></a> For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who recognizes the Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life, and I will resurrect him on the last day.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***inv p. 2 You Are Invited***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p4"><strong>AT OUR PUBLIC MEETINGS</strong></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Why attend these programs?</strong></p>
<p class="p6">To learn how the Bible relates to our times.</p>
<p class="p7">To learn how to apply its teachings in our life.</p>
<p class="p8">To strengthen our faith in God.</p>
<p class="p9">To enjoy upbuilding association with loving, caring people.</p>
<p class="p10">Everyone is welcome, and no collections are taken.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>Where and when are the meetings held?</strong></p>
<p class="p12">To find a Kingdom Hall near you, go to www.jw.org. (Look under ABOUT US > MEETINGS)</p>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***kr pp. 9-12 “Let Your Kingdom Come”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>When Would God’s Kingdom Be Established?</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>11. </strong>What did Jesus indicate about the establishment of God’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jesus indicated that the Kingdom would not be established in the first century C.E., despite the expectations of some of his disciples. (<span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96">Acts 1:6</a>) Consider what he said in two different parables given less than two years apart.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>12. </strong>How does the parable of the wheat and the weeds indicate that the Kingdom was not established in the first century C.E.?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>12 </sup>The parable of the wheat and the weeds. (Read </strong><span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97"><strong>Matthew 13:24-30</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>After relating this parable, perhaps in the spring of 31 C.E., Jesus explained it to his disciples. (<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">Matt. 13:36-43</a>) Here is the gist of the parable and its meaning: Following the death of the apostles, the Devil would sow weeds (imitation Christians) in among wheat (“sons of the Kingdom,” or anointed Christians). Both the wheat and the weeds would be allowed to grow together during a growing season that would continue until the harvest, which is “a conclusion of a system of things.” After the beginning of the harvest season, the weeds would be collected. Then, the wheat would be gathered. The parable thus indicates that the Kingdom would be established, not in the first century C.E., but only after the growing season ended. As matters worked out, the growing season ended and the harvest season began in 1914.</p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>THE WHEAT AND THE WEEDS</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxSubTtl"><p><strong>(</strong><span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99"><strong>Matt. 13:24-30</strong></a><strong>)</strong></p></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p53">Jesus indicated that the Kingdom would not be established in the first century C.E., despite the expectations of some of his disciples</p>
<ol><li><h3><strong>33 C.E. Sowing Begins</strong></h3>
<ol><li><p class="p55">‘A man sowed fine seed in his field’ (<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Matt. 13:24</a>)</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p56">‘While men were sleeping, the enemy oversowed weeds’ (<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Matt. 13:25</a>)</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p57">“Both grow together until the harvest” (<span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102">Matt. 13:30</a>)</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>1914 Harvest Season Begins</strong></h3>
<ol><li><p class="p59">The weeds are collected and bundled (<span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103">Matt. 13:30</a>)</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
</aside></div>
<p class="qu"><strong>13. </strong>How did Jesus illustrate that he would not be installed as Messianic King immediately after his return to heaven?</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>13 </sup>The parable of the minas. (Read </strong><span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104"><strong>Luke 19:11-13</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Jesus gave this parable in 33 C.E. on his way to Jerusalem for the last time. Some of his listeners thought that he would set up his Kingdom as soon as they arrived in Jerusalem. To correct that notion and to show that the establishment of the Kingdom was yet a long way off, Jesus compared himself to “a man of noble birth” who had to travel “to a distant land to secure kingly power.”<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> In Jesus’ case, the “distant land” was heaven, where he would receive power as King from his Father. But Jesus knew that he would not be installed as Messianic King immediately after his return to heaven. Instead, he would sit at God’s right hand and wait until the appointed time. As it turned out, that wait lasted for many centuries.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105">Ps. 110:1, 2;</a><span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106"> Matt. 22:43, 44;</a><span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107"> Heb. 10:12, 13</a>.</p>
<h2><strong>When Will God’s Kingdom Come?</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>14. </strong>(a) How did Jesus answer the question that four of his apostles asked him? (b) What does the fulfillment of Jesus’ prophecy tell us about his presence and the Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>A few days before Jesus was put to death, four of his apostles asked him: “What will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?” (<span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108">Matt. 24:3;</a><span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109"> Mark 13:4</a>) Jesus answered by relating the extensive prophecy that is recorded in <span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110">Matthew chapters 24</a> and <span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111">25</a>. Jesus detailed various global events that would serve as a sign identifying a time period called his “presence.” The <em>start </em>of his presence would coincide with the <em>establishment </em>of the Kingdom; and the <em>culmination </em>of his presence, with the <em>coming </em>of the Kingdom. We have ample proof that Jesus’ prophecy has been undergoing fulfillment since 1914.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> Hence, that year marked the start of his presence and the establishment of the Kingdom.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>15, 16. </strong>To whom do the words “this generation” refer?</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When, though, will God’s Kingdom finally come? Jesus did not reveal exactly when that would happen. (<span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112">Matt. 24:36</a>) But he did say something that should assure us that it is very near indeed. Jesus indicated that the Kingdom would come after “this generation” witnessed the fulfillment of the prophetic sign. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113"><strong>Matthew 24:32-34</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>To whom does the expression “this generation” refer? Let us take a closer look at Jesus’ words.</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>16 </sup>“This generation.” </strong>Did Jesus have in mind unbelievers? No. Consider his audience. Jesus related this prophecy to a few apostles who had “approached him privately.” (<span id="citationsource114"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation114">Matt. 24:3</a>) The apostles would soon be anointed with holy spirit. Note also the context. Before he spoke about “this generation,” Jesus said: “Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors.” Jesus’ anointed followers<wbr />—not unbelievers—<wbr />would see the things he foretold and would discern their significance, namely, that Jesus “is near at the doors.” Therefore, when Jesus spoke of “this generation,” he had in mind his <em>anointed followers.</em></p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>GENERATION</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxSubTtl"><p><strong>(</strong><span id="citationsource115"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation115"><strong>Matt. 24:32-34</strong></a><strong>)</strong></p></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p63">Jesus indicated that the Kingdom will come after “this generation” has witnessed the fulfillment of the prophetic sign (See paragraphs 17, 18)</p>
<p class="p66">GROUP 1: Anointed ones who saw the beginning of the fulfillment of the sign in 1914</p>
<p class="p67">GROUP 2: Anointed ones who were contemporaries of the first group; some of these will live to see the great tribulation</p>
</div>
</aside></div>
<p class="qu"><strong>17. </strong>What is the meaning of the expressions “generation” and “all these things”?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>17 </sup>“Will by no means pass away until all these things happen.” </strong>How will those words prove true? To answer that, we need to know two things: the meaning both of “generation” and of “all these things.” The term “generation” often refers to people of varying ages whose lives overlap during a particular period of time. A generation is not overly long, and it comes to an end. (<span id="citationsource116"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation116">Ex. 1:6</a>) The expression “all these things” includes all the foretold events during Jesus’ presence, from its beginning in 1914 until its culmination at the “great tribulation.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource117"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation117">Matt. 24:21</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>18, 19. </strong>How may we understand Jesus’ words about “this generation,” and what may we conclude?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>How, then, may we understand Jesus’ words about “this generation”? The generation consists of two overlapping groups of anointed ones<wbr />—the first is made up of anointed ones who saw the beginning of the fulfillment of the sign in 1914 and the second, anointed ones who for a time were contemporaries of the first group. At least some of those in the second group will live to see the beginning of the coming tribulation. The two groups form one generation because their lives as anointed Christians overlapped for a time.<span id="footnotesource3"></span><a href="#footnote3">*</a></p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>What may we conclude? Well, we know that the sign of Jesus’ presence in Kingdom power is clearly evident around the globe. We also see that the anointed ones who are still alive and part of “this generation” are getting on in years; yet, they will not all die off before the great tribulation begins. Therefore, we can conclude that very soon indeed God’s Kingdom will come and exercise its rule over the earth! How thrilling it will be to witness the fulfillment of the prayer that Jesus taught us: “Let your Kingdom come”!</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20. </strong>What vital field of study will be discussed in this publication, and what will be examined in the next chapter?</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Let us never forget the words that Jehovah himself spoke from heaven regarding his Son: “Listen to him.” As true Christians, we are eager to heed that divine direction. We are keenly interested in everything that Jesus said and taught about God’s Kingdom. What that Kingdom has already accomplished and will do in the future is the vital field of study that will be discussed in this publication. The next chapter will examine the exciting developments that surrounded the birth of God’s Kingdom in heaven.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Acts 1:6)</strong> So when they had assembled, they asked him: “Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 13:24-30)</strong> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When the stalk sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>So the slaves of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it have weeds?’ <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ The slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’ <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He said, ‘No, for fear that while collecting the weeds, you uproot the wheat with them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 13:36-43)</strong> Then after dismissing the crowds, he went into the house. His disciples came to him and said: “Explain to us the illustration of the weeds in the field.” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>In response he said: “The sower of the fine seed is the Son of man; <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>the field is the world. As for the fine seed, these are the sons of the Kingdom, but the weeds are the sons of the wicked one, <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>and the enemy who sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is a conclusion of a system of things,* and the reapers are angels. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>Therefore, just as the weeds are collected and burned with fire, so it will be in the conclusion of the system of things.* <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>The Son of man will send his angels, and they will collect out from his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling and people who practice lawlessness, <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>and they will pitch them into the fiery furnace. There is where their weeping and the gnashing of their teeth will be. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>At that time the righteous ones will shine as brightly as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Let the one who has ears listen.</p><p></p><p>Or “an age.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:24-30)</strong></a> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When the stalk sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>So the slaves of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it have weeds?’ <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ The slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’ <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He said, ‘No, for fear that while collecting the weeds, you uproot the wheat with them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:24)</strong></a> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:25)</strong></a> While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:30)</strong></a> Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:30)</strong></a> Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Luke 19:11-13)</strong> While they were listening to these things, he told another illustration, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the Kingdom of God was going to appear instantly. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So he said: “A man of noble birth traveled to a distant land to secure kingly power for himself and to return. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Calling ten of his slaves, he gave them ten miʹnas* and told them, ‘Do business with these until I come.’</p><p></p><p>A Greek mina weighed 340 g (10.9 oz t) and was reckoned to be worth 100 drachmas. See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 110:1, 2)</strong> Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand Until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 22:43, 44)</strong> He asked them: “How is it, then, that David under inspiration calls him Lord, saying, <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>‘Jehovah* said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet”’?</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:12, 13)</strong> But this man offered one sacrifice for sins for all time and sat down at the right hand of God, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>from then on waiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Mark 13:4)</strong> “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things are to come to a conclusion?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:1-51)</strong> Now as Jesus was departing from the temple, his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In response he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, by no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.” <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”* <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads you, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Many false prophets will arise and mislead many; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But the one who has endured* to the end will be saved. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>“Therefore, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken about by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place (let the reader use discernment), <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>and let the man in the field not return to pick up his outer garment. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Keep praying that your flight may not occur in wintertime nor on the Sabbath day; <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Look! I have forewarned you. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Therefore, if people say to you, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘Look! He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For just as the lightning comes out of the east and shines over to the west, so the presence* of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>“Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And he will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>“Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence* of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>Then two men will be in the field; one will be taken along and the other abandoned. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Two women will be grinding at the hand mill; one will be taken along and the other abandoned. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>“But know one thing: If the householder had known in what watch* the thief was coming, he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>On this account, you too prove yourselves ready, because the Son of man is coming at an hour that you do not think to be it. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>“Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>“But if ever that evil slave says in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’ <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>and he starts to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards, <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know, <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>and he will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his place with the hypocrites. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “who endures.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “at what time of night.”</p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 25:1-46)</strong> “Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’ <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’ <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave five talents* to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’ <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Well, then, you should have deposited my money* with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’ <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>“Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably; <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>naked* and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you visited me.’ <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked and clothe you? <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>In reply the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’ <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>“Then he will say to those on his left: ‘Go away from me, you who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>For I became hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat; and I was thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>I was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick and in prison, but you did not look after me.’ <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>Then they too will answer with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’ <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>Then he will answer them, saying: ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did not do it to one of these least ones, you did not do it to me.’ <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>These will depart into everlasting cutting-off,* but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p><p>A Greek talent equaled 20.4 kg (654 oz t). See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Or “not sufficiently dressed.”</p><p>That is, from life. Lit., “lopping off; pruning.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:36)</strong> “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:32-34)</strong> “Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation114"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource114">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation115"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource115">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:32-34)</strong></a> “Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation116"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource116">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 1:6)</strong> Joseph eventually died, and also all his brothers and all that generation.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation117"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource117">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:21)</strong> for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> Jesus’ parable may well have reminded his listeners of Archelaus, a son of Herod the Great. Before Herod died, he designated Archelaus as heir to rulership over Judea and other areas. However, before he could begin ruling, Archelaus first had to make the long journey to Rome in order to secure the approval of Augustus Caesar.</p></div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> For more information, see chapter 9 of the book <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em></p></div>
<div id="footnote3"><p><a href="#footnotesource3">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> Anyone who was anointed after the death of the last of the anointed ones in the first group<wbr />—that is, after those who witnessed the “beginning of pangs of distress” in 1914—<wbr />would not be part of “this generation.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource118"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation118">Matt. 24:8</a>.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation118"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource118">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:8)</strong></a> All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***kr p. 10 “Let Your Kingdom Come”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>THE WHEAT AND THE WEEDS</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxSubTtl"><p><strong>(</strong><span id="citationsource119"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation119"><strong>Matt. 13:24-30</strong></a><strong>)</strong></p></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p53">Jesus indicated that the Kingdom would not be established in the first century C.E., despite the expectations of some of his disciples</p>
<ol><li><h3><strong>33 C.E. Sowing Begins</strong></h3>
<ol><li><p class="p55">‘A man sowed fine seed in his field’ (<span id="citationsource120"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation120">Matt. 13:24</a>)</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p56">‘While men were sleeping, the enemy oversowed weeds’ (<span id="citationsource121"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation121">Matt. 13:25</a>)</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p57">“Both grow together until the harvest” (<span id="citationsource122"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation122">Matt. 13:30</a>)</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
<li><h3><strong>1914 Harvest Season Begins</strong></h3>
<ol><li><p class="p59">The weeds are collected and bundled (<span id="citationsource123"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation123">Matt. 13:30</a>)</p>
</li>
</ol>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation119"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource119">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:24-30)</strong></a> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When the stalk sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>So the slaves of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it have weeds?’ <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ The slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’ <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He said, ‘No, for fear that while collecting the weeds, you uproot the wheat with them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation120"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource120">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:24)</strong></a> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation121"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource121">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:25)</strong></a> While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation122"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource122">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:30)</strong></a> Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation123"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource123">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:30)</strong></a> Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource17">^ <span id="pcitation17"></span><strong>***kr p. 12 “Let Your Kingdom Come”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>GENERATION</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxSubTtl"><p><strong>(</strong><span id="citationsource124"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation124"><strong>Matt. 24:32-34</strong></a><strong>)</strong></p></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p63">Jesus indicated that the Kingdom will come after “this generation” has witnessed the fulfillment of the prophetic sign (See paragraphs 17, 18)</p>
<p class="p66">GROUP 1: Anointed ones who saw the beginning of the fulfillment of the sign in 1914</p>
<p class="p67">GROUP 2: Anointed ones who were contemporaries of the first group; some of these will live to see the great tribulation</p>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation124"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource124">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:32-34)</strong></a> “Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016330.xhtml#pcitationsource18">^ <span id="pcitation18"></span><strong>***snnw song 145 Preparing to Preach***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 145</p>
<h1><strong>Preparing to Preach</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource125"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation125">Jeremiah 1:17</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             Morning comes.</p>
<p class="p8">Soon we will be</p>
<p class="p9">On our way to preach good news.</p>
<p class="p10">But it’s dark outside,</p>
<p class="p11">And the rain starts to fall.</p>
<p class="p12">It would be easy to stay inside,</p>
<p class="p13">sleepy-eyed.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p14">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p15">Positive thoughts and preparation,</p>
<p class="p16">Praying that we’ll succeed;</p>
<p class="p17">This can provide the inspiration,</p>
<p class="p18">We’ll surely need.</p>
<p class="p19">We’re not alone; the angels guide us.</p>
<p class="p20">Jesus commands them all.</p>
<p class="p21">And with a loyal friend beside us,</p>
<p class="p22">We’ll never fall.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p23">             Soon we’ll see</p>
<p class="p24">Joy come our way</p>
<p class="p25">If these things we keep in mind.</p>
<p class="p26">And Jehovah sees</p>
<p class="p27">Ev’ry effort we make,</p>
<p class="p28">And he remembers the love we show;</p>
<p class="p29">this we know.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p30">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p31">Positive thoughts and preparation,</p>
<p class="p32">Praying that we’ll succeed;</p>
<p class="p33">This can provide the inspiration,</p>
<p class="p34">We’ll surely need.</p>
<p class="p35">We’re not alone; the angels guide us.</p>
<p class="p36">Jesus commands them all.</p>
<p class="p37">And with a loyal friend beside us,</p>
<p class="p38">We’ll never fall.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p39">(See also <span id="citationsource126"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation126">Eccl. 11:4;</a><span id="citationsource127"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation127"> Matt. 10:5,</a><span id="citationsource128"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation128"> 7;</a><span id="citationsource129"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation129"> Luke 10:1;</a><span id="citationsource130"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation130"> Titus 2:14</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation125"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource125">^ <strong>(Jer. 1:17)</strong></a> But you should prepare for action,* And you must stand up and tell them everything that I command you. Do not be terrified of them, So that I do not terrify you before them.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “gird up your hips.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation126"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource126">^ <strong>(Eccl. 11:4)</strong></a> The one who watches the wind will not sow seed, and the one who looks at the clouds will not reap.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation127"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource127">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:5)</strong></a> These 12 Jesus sent out, giving them these instructions: “Do not go off into the road of the nations, and do not enter any Sa·marʹi·tan city;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation128"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource128">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:7)</strong></a> As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation129"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource129">^ <strong>(Luke 10:1)</strong></a> After these things the Lord designated 70 others and sent them out by twos ahead of him into every city and place where he himself was to go.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation130"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource130">^ <strong>(Titus 2:14)</strong></a> who gave himself for us to set us free* from every sort of lawlessness and to cleanse for himself a people who are his own special possession, zealous for fine works.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “to ransom us; to redeem us.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
