<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 We Are Wonderfully Made</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016328.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 135:1-141:10)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Praise Jah!* Praise the name of Jehovah; Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You who are standing in the house of Jehovah, In the courtyards of the house of our God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Praise Jah, for Jehovah is good. Sing praises* to his name, for it is pleasant.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For Jah has chosen Jacob for himself, Israel for his special property.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For I well know that Jehovah is great; Our Lord is greater than all other gods.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah does everything he pleases to do In heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the depths.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He causes clouds* to ascend from the ends of the earth; He makes lightning for* the rain; He brings the wind out of his storehouses.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He struck down the firstborn of Egypt, Both man and beast.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He sent signs and miracles among you, O Egypt, Against Pharʹaoh and all his servants. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He struck down many nations And killed mighty kings <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>—Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, Og the king of Baʹshan, And all the kingdoms of Caʹnaan. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He gave their land as an inheritance, An inheritance to Israel his people. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, your name endures forever. O Jehovah, your fame* endures for all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will defend* his people, And he will feel compassion* for his servants. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The idols of the nations are silver and gold, The work of human hands. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; Eyes, but they cannot see; <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Ears they have, but they cannot hear. There is no breath in their mouth. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The people who make them will become just like them, As will all those who trust in them. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O house of Israel, praise Jehovah. O house of Aaron, praise Jehovah. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>O house of Leʹvi, praise Jehovah. You who fear Jehovah, praise Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised from Zion, The One residing in Jerusalem. Praise Jah! </p><p><strong>136 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Give thanks to the God of gods, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Give thanks to the Lord of lords, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He alone does great wonders, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He skillfully made* the heavens, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He spread out the earth over the waters, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He made the great lights, For his loyal love endures forever,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The sun to rule over the day, For his loyal love endures forever,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The moon and the stars to rule over the night, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He struck down Egypt’s firstborn, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>He brought Israel out from their midst, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>With a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the Red Sea in two,* For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He caused Israel to pass through the middle of it, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He shook off Pharʹaoh and his army into the Red Sea, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He led his people through the wilderness, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He struck down great kings, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He killed mighty kings, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>And Og the king of Baʹshan, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He gave their land as an inheritance, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>An inheritance to Israel his servant, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He remembered us when we were low, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He kept rescuing us from our adversaries, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>He gives food to every living thing,* For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Give thanks to the God of the heavens, For his loyal love endures forever. </p><p><strong>137 </strong>By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat. We wept when we remembered Zion.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Upon the poplar trees in her* midst, We hung our harps.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For there our captors asked us for a song, Those mocking us wanted amusement: “Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>How can we sing the song of Jehovah On foreign soil?  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If I should forget you, O Jerusalem, Let my right hand be forgetful.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Let my tongue stick to my palate If I do not remember you, If I do not place Jerusalem above My greatest reasons for rejoicing.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Remember, O Jehovah, What the Eʹdom·ites said on the day Jerusalem fell: “Tear it down! Tear it down to its foundations!”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O daughter of Babylon, who is soon to be devastated, Happy will be the one who rewards you With the treatment you inflicted on us.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Happy will be the one who seizes your children And dashes them against the rocks. </p><p>Of David. <strong>138 </strong>I will praise you with all my heart. In the face of other gods, I will sing praises.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will bow down toward your holy temple,* And I will praise your name Because of your loyal love and your faithfulness. For you have magnified your saying and your name above everything else.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>On the day I called, you answered me; You made me bold* and strong.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>All the kings of the earth will praise you, O Jehovah, For they will have heard the promises you have spoken.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will sing about the ways of Jehovah, For the glory of Jehovah is great.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble, But the haughty he knows only from a distance.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Even when I walk in the midst of danger, you will preserve me alive. You stretch out your hand against the anger of my enemies; Your right hand will save me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will accomplish all things in my behalf. O Jehovah, your loyal love endures forever; Do not forsake the works of your hands. </p><p>For the director. Of David. A melody. <strong>139 </strong>O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You observe* me when I travel and when I lie down; You are familiar with all my ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>There is not a word on my tongue, But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Behind and before me, you surround me; And you lay your hand upon me.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension.* It is too high for me to reach.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Where can I escape from your spirit, And where can I run away from your face?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there, And if I were to make my bed in the Grave,* look! you would be there.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If I would fly away with the wings of the dawn To reside by the most remote sea, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Even there your hand would lead me And your right hand would take hold of me. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!” Then the night around me would become light. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Even the darkness would not be too dark for you, But night would be as bright as the day; Darkness is the same as light to you. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For you produced my kidneys; You kept me screened off* in my mother’s womb. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know* this very well. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My bones were not hidden from you When I was made in secret, When I was woven in the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; All its parts were written in your book Regarding the days when they were formed, Before any of them existed. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them! <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O God, if only you would slay the wicked! Then the violent* men would depart from me, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Those who say things against you with evil intent;* They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah, And loathe those who revolt against you? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I have nothing but hatred for them; They have become real enemies to me. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious* thoughts. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>See whether there is in me any harmful way, And lead me in the way of eternity. </p><p>For the director. A melody of David. <strong>140 </strong>Rescue me, O Jehovah, from evil men; Protect me from violent men,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Those who scheme evil in their hearts And stir up conflict all day long.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They sharpen their tongue like that of a serpent; Venom of vipers is behind their lips. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Protect me, O Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked; Safeguard me from violent men, Those who scheme to trip me.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The haughty ones hide a trap for me; With ropes they spread out a net beside the path. They set snares for me. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I say to Jehovah: “You are my God. Listen, O Jehovah, to my pleas for help.”  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, my strong Savior, You shield my head in the day of battle.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not grant, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked. Do not let their plots succeed, so that they are not exalted. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>May the heads of those surrounding me Be covered with the evil spoken by their lips. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>May burning coals rain down on them. May they be hurled into the fire, Into deep pits,* never to rise again. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May the slanderer find no place on the earth.* May evil pursue men of violence and strike them down. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I know that Jehovah will defend the lowly And give justice to the poor. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely the righteous will give thanks to your name; The upright will dwell before your face.* </p><p>A melody of David. <strong>141 </strong>O Jehovah, I call on you. Come quickly to help me. Do pay attention when I call to you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May my prayer be as incense prepared before you, My uplifted hands like the evening grain offering.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Station a guard for my mouth, O Jehovah, Do set a watch over the door of my lips.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not let my heart incline to anything bad, To share in vile deeds with evil men; May I never feast on their delicacies.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love; Should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head, Which my head would never refuse. My prayer will continue even during their calamities.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Though their judges are thrown down from the cliff, The people will pay attention to my words, for they are pleasant.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Just as when someone plows and breaks up the soil, So our bones have been scattered at the mouth of the Grave.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But my eyes look to you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. In you I have taken refuge. Do not take away my life.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Protect me from the jaws of the trap they have laid for me, From the snares of evildoers. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The wicked will fall into their own nets all together While I pass by safely.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “treasured possession.”</p><p>Or “vapors.”</p><p>Or possibly, “makes sluices for.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Or “plead the cause of.”</p><p>Or “feel regret.”</p><p>Or “made with understanding.”</p><p>Lit., “into pieces.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Referring to Babylon.</p><p>Or possibly, “wither.”</p><p>Or possibly, “In defiance of other gods, I will make music to you.”</p><p>Or “sanctuary.”</p><p>Or possibly, “you have magnified your saying above all your name.”</p><p>Or “bold in my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “measure.”</p><p>Or “is too amazing for me.”</p><p>Or “too much for me to fathom.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “wove me together.”</p><p>Or “My soul knows.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p><p>Or “bloodguilty.”</p><p>Or “according to their idea.”</p><p>Or “disquieting.”</p><p>Or “Into watery pits.”</p><p>Or “in the land.”</p><p>Or “in your presence.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “pour out my soul.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
