<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 “Jehovah Is Great and Most Worthy of Praise”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016331.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 142:0-150:6)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Masʹkil.* Of David when he was in the cave. A prayer. <strong>142 </strong>With my voice I call to Jehovah for help; With my voice I plead with Jehovah for favor.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before him I pour out my concern; Before him I tell about my distress  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When my spirit* fails within me. Then you watch my roadway. In the path where I walk, They hide a trap for me.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look at my right hand and see That no one cares about* me. There is nowhere I can flee; No one is concerned about me.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I call to you, O Jehovah, for help. I say: “You are my refuge, All I have* in the land of the living.”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Pay attention to my cry for help, For I have been brought very low. Rescue me from my persecutors, For they are stronger than I am.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Bring me* out of the dungeon To praise your name. May the righteous gather around me Because you deal kindly with me. </p><p>A melody of David. <strong>143 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Listen to my plea for help. In your faithfulness and in your righteousness, answer me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not enter into judgment with your servant, For no one living can be righteous before you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the enemy pursues me;* He has crushed my life into the ground. He has caused me to dwell in darkness like those long dead.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My spirit* is failing; My heart is numb within me.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I remember the days of old; I meditate on all your activity; I eagerly ponder over* the work of your hands.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I spread out my hands to you; I am* like a parched land that thirsts for you. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do answer me quickly, O Jehovah; My strength* has come to an end. Do not hide your face from me, Or I will be like those going down into the pit.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let me hear your loyal love in the morning, For I trust in you. Make known to me the way I should walk, For to you I turn.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Rescue me from my enemies, O Jehovah. I seek your protection. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Teach me to do your will, For you are my God. Your spirit is good; May it lead me on level ground.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For the sake of your name, O Jehovah, preserve me alive. In your righteousness, rescue me* from distress. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In your loyal love, put an end to* my enemies; Destroy all those harassing me,* For I am your servant. </p><p>Of David. <strong>144 </strong>May Jehovah, my Rock, be praised, Who trains my hands for battle, My fingers for warfare.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He is my loyal love and my stronghold, My secure refuge* and my rescuer, My shield and the One in whom I have taken shelter, The One subduing peoples under me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, what is man that you should notice him, The son of mortal man that you should pay attention to him?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Man resembles a mere breath; His days are like a passing shadow.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, lower* your heavens and descend; Touch the mountains and make them smoke.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Make lightning flash and scatter the enemy; Shoot your arrows and throw them into confusion.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Stretch out your hands from above; Rescue me and save me from the surging waters, From the hand* of the foreigners,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whose mouths speak lies And who raise their right hand to swear to what is false.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>O God, I will sing to you a new song. I will sing praises* to you, accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>To the One who gives victory* to kings, The One rescuing his servant David from the deadly sword. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Rescue me and save me from the hand of the foreigners, Whose mouths speak lies And who raise their right hand to swear to what is false. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then our sons will be like young plants that grow up quickly, Our daughters like corner pillars carved for a palace. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Our storehouses will overflow with every kind of produce; Our flocks in our fields will multiply by the thousands, by the tens of thousands. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Our cattle, heavy with young, will suffer no mishap* or miscarriage; There will be no cry of distress in our public squares. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Happy is the people for whom it is this way! Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah! </p><p>A praise of David. <strong>145 </strong>I will exalt you, O my God the King, I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All day long I will praise you; I will praise your name forever and ever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise; His greatness is unsearchable.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Generation after generation will praise your works; They will tell about your mighty acts.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Of the glorious splendor of your majesty they will speak And on your wonderful works I will meditate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will speak about your awe-inspiring deeds,* And I will declare your greatness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will bubble over as they recall your abundant goodness, And they will shout joyfully because of your righteousness.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful, Slow to anger and great in loyal love.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is good to all, And his mercy is evident in all his works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All your works will glorify you, O Jehovah, And your loyal ones will praise you. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They will proclaim the glory of your kingship And speak about your mightiness, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To make known to men your mighty acts And the glorious splendor of your kingship. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your kingship is an eternal kingship, And your dominion endures throughout all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah supports all who are falling And raises up all who are bowed down. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>All eyes look hopefully to you; You give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>You open your hand And satisfy the desire of every living thing. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He satisfies the desire of those who fear him; He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jehovah guards all those who love him, But all the wicked he will annihilate. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever. </p><p><strong>146 </strong>Praise Jah!* Let my whole being* praise Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will praise Jehovah all my life. I will sing praises* to my God as long as I live.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not put your trust in princes* Nor in a son of man, who cannot bring salvation.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>His spirit* goes out, he returns to the ground; On that very day his thoughts perish.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the one who has the God of Jacob as his helper, Whose hope is in Jehovah his God,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The Maker of heaven and earth, Of the sea, and of all that is in them, The One who always remains faithful,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The One securing justice for those defrauded, The One giving bread to the hungry. Jehovah is releasing the prisoners.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is opening the eyes of the blind; Jehovah is raising up those bowed down; Jehovah loves the righteous.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jehovah is protecting the foreign residents; He sustains the fatherless child and the widow, But he thwarts the plans of the wicked.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Jehovah will be King forever, Your God, O Zion, for generation after generation. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>147 </strong>Praise Jah!* It is good to sing praises* to our God; How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah is building Jerusalem; He gathers together the dispersed ones of Israel.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He heals the brokenhearted; He binds up their wounds.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He counts the number of the stars; He calls all of them by name.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Our Lord is great and is mighty in power; His understanding is beyond measure.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah raises up the meek, But he hurls the wicked to the ground.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving; Sing praises to our God, accompanied by the harp,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The One who covers the heavens with clouds, The One providing rain for the earth, The One making grass sprout on the mountains.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>To the animals he gives food, To the young ravens that call out for it. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He does not delight in the power of the horse; Nor is he impressed by the strong legs of a man. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah finds pleasure in those who fear him, In those waiting for his loyal love. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Glorify Jehovah, O Jerusalem. Praise your God, O Zion. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He makes the bars of your city gates strong; He blesses your sons within you. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He brings peace to your territory; He satisfies you with the finest* wheat. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He sends his command to the earth; His word runs swiftly. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He sends the snow like wool; He scatters the frost just like ashes. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He hurls down his hailstones* like morsels of bread. Who can withstand his cold? <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He sends out his word, and they melt. He makes his wind blow, and the waters flow. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He declares his word to Jacob, His regulations and judgments to Israel. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He has not done so with any other nation; They know nothing about his judgments. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>148 </strong>Praise Jah!* Praise Jehovah from the heavens; Praise him in the heights.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Praise him, all his angels. Praise him, all his army.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Praise him, sun and moon. Praise him, all shining stars.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Praise him, O highest heavens* And waters above the heavens.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let them praise the name of Jehovah, For he commanded, and they were created.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He keeps them established forever and ever; He has issued a decree that will not pass away.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah from the earth, You great sea creatures and all deep waters,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You lightning and hail, snow and thick clouds, You storm wind, carrying out his word,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You mountains and all you hills, You fruit trees and all you cedars, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You wild animals and all you domestic animals, You creeping things and winged birds, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You kings of the earth and all you nations, You princes and all you judges of the earth, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You young men and young women,* Old men and young together.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Let them praise the name of Jehovah, For his name alone is unreachably high. His majesty is above earth and heaven. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He will exalt the strength* of his people, For the praise of all his loyal ones, Of the sons of Israel, the people close to him. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>149 </strong>Praise Jah!* Sing to Jehovah a new song; Praise him in the congregation of the loyal ones.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let Israel rejoice in its Grand Maker; Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let them praise his name with dancing And sing praises* to him, accompanied by the tambourine and the harp.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people. He adorns the meek with salvation.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let the loyal ones exult in glory; Let them shout for joy upon their beds.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Let the songs praising God be in their throat, And a two-edged sword be in their hand,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>To execute vengeance on the nations And punishment on the peoples,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>To bind their kings with shackles And their nobles with iron fetters,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>To execute the judgment written against them. This honor belongs to all his loyal ones. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>150 </strong>Praise Jah!* Praise God in his holy place. Praise him in the expanse of* his strength.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Praise him for his mighty works. Praise him for his exceeding greatness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Praise him with the sounding of the horn. Praise him with the stringed instrument and the harp.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Praise him with the tambourine and the circle dance. Praise him with strings and the flute.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Praise him with ringing cymbals. Praise him with crashing cymbals.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Every breathing thing—let it praise Jah. Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “strength.”</p><p>Lit., “recognizes.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “My share.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “strength.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “spirit.”</p><p>Or “grave.”</p><p>Or “For I lift up my soul to you.”</p><p>Or “in the land of uprightness.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “silence.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Or “bend.”</p><p>Or “grip.”</p><p>Lit., “And their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “salvation.”</p><p>Or “rupture.”</p><p>Or “beyond understanding.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “nobles.”</p><p>Or “breath.”</p><p>Lit., “bound ones.”</p><p>Or “makes the way of the wicked crooked.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Lit., “the fat of.”</p><p>Or “ice.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “heavens of the heavens.”</p><p>Lit., “virgins.”</p><p>Or “Old and young together.”</p><p>Lit., “the horn.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “the sky that bears witness to.”</p><p>Or “pipe.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
