<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 Avoid These Pitfalls When Conducting a Bible Study</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***be p. 253 pars. 3-4 Reasoning Manner***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p17"><strong><em>Ask Questions. </em></strong>Jesus set an outstanding example in reasoning with people. He took into account their background and used illustrations that they would readily accept. He also made effective use of questions. This gave others opportunity to express themselves and revealed what was in their hearts. It also encouraged them to reason on the matter being considered.</p>
<p class="p18">A man versed in the Law asked Jesus: “Teacher, by doing what shall I inherit everlasting life?” Jesus could easily have given him the answer. But he invited the man to express himself. “What is written in the Law? How do <em>you </em>read?” The man answered correctly. Did his giving a correct answer end that discussion? Not at all. Jesus let the man continue, and a question that the man himself asked indicated that he was trying to prove himself righteous. He asked: “Who really is my neighbor?” Rather than give a definition, which the man might have disputed because of the prevailing Jewish attitude toward Gentiles and Samaritans, Jesus invited him to reason on an illustration. It was about a neighborly Samaritan who came to the aid of a traveler that had been robbed and beaten, whereas a priest and a Levite did not. With a simple question, Jesus made sure that the man got the point. Jesus’ manner of reasoning made the expression “neighbor” take on a meaning that this man had never before discerned. (<span id="citationsource6"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation6">Luke 10:25-37</a>) What a fine example to imitate! Instead of doing all the talking yourself, in effect, thinking for your householder, learn how to use tactful questions and illustrations to encourage your listener to think.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation6"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource6">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Luke 10:25-37)</strong> Now look! a man versed in the Law stood up to test him and said: “Teacher, what do I need to do to inherit everlasting life?” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He said to him: “What is written in the Law? How do you read?” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>In answer he said: “‘You must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole strength and with your whole mind’ and ‘your neighbor as yourself.’” <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He said to him: “You answered correctly; keep doing this and you will get life.” <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>But wanting to prove himself righteous, the man said to Jesus: “Who really is my neighbor?” <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>In reply Jesus said: “A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jerʹi·cho and fell victim to robbers, who stripped him, beat him, and went off, leaving him half-dead. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Now by coincidence a priest was going down on that road, but when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Likewise, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the opposite side. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>But a certain Sa·marʹi·tan traveling the road came upon him, and at seeing him, he was moved with pity. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>So he approached him and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them. Then he mounted him on his own animal and brought him to an inn and took care of him. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The next day he took out two de·narʹi·i,* gave them to the innkeeper, and said: ‘Take care of him, and whatever you spend besides this, I will repay you when I return.’ <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Who of these three seems to you to have made himself neighbor to the man who fell victim to the robbers?” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He said: “The one who acted mercifully toward him.” Jesus then said to him: “Go and do the same yourself.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***be p. 238 pars. 1-2 Effective Use of Questions***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p16">When we conduct Bible studies, we use a method that calls for participation by the student. Of course, the greater good is done if the student does not simply recite the printed answers. In a kindly tone, use auxiliary questions to reason with the student. On key thoughts, encourage him to use the Bible as the basis for his reply. You might also ask: “How does what we are discussing fit in with this other point that we have studied? Why is it important? How should it affect our lives?” Such a method is more effective than expressing your own convictions or giving an extended explanation yourself. In this way, you help the student to use his “power of reason” to worship God.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource7"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation7">Rom. 12:1</a>.</p>
<p class="p17">If a student does not grasp a certain idea, be patient. He may be trying to compare what you are saying with what he has believed for many years. Approaching the subject from a different angle might help. Sometimes, however, very basic reasoning is needed. Make liberal use of the Scriptures. Use illustrations. Along with these, use simple questions that invite the person to reason on the evidence.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation7"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource7">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 12:1)</strong> Therefore, I appeal to you by the compassions of God, brothers, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, a sacred service with your power of reason.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***be p. 230 par. 4 Informative to Your Audience***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p10">Adjust the pace of your delivery according to what your audience knows. If you include some details that are likely familiar to most, cover these fairly quickly. But slow down when presenting ideas that may be new to the majority of your listeners so that they can grasp these clearly.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***be p. 226 pars. 4-5 Understandable to Others***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p10">Even when you deal with deep material, simplicity of style can help make it easier to understand. How can simplicity be achieved? Do not overwhelm your audience with unnecessary details. Organize your material so that it complements your main points. Select your key scriptures carefully. Rather than rushing from one text to another, read and discuss these. Do not bury a good thought in a multitude of words.</p>
<p class="p11">When you conduct a home Bible study, apply those same principles. Do not try to explain all the details. Help the student to understand clearly the principal ideas. Later on, in personal study and at congregation meetings, he can fill in the details.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***be p. 235 par. 3 Use of Assigned Material***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p13">This training can also help you to conduct progressive home Bible studies. You will learn to focus attention on the study material instead of digressing from the subject by highlighting other things that may be interesting but not necessary to an understanding of the subject. Yet, if you get the spirit of this lesson, you will not become so rigid that you fail to provide added explanation that a student may require.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***be p. 144 pars. 1-3 Use of Bible in Replying***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p10">Our desire is to follow Jesus’ example. We have not personally heard God speak, as Jesus did. But the Bible is God’s Word. When we use it as the basis for our answers, we avoid drawing attention to ourselves. We show that instead of voicing the opinion of an imperfect human, we are firmly determined to let God have the say as to what is truth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">John 7:18;</a><span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9"> Rom. 3:4</a>.</p>
<p class="p11">Of course, our desire is not merely to use the Bible but to do so in a way that will be most beneficial to our hearer. We want him to listen with an open mind. Depending on the attitude of the person, you could introduce Biblical thoughts by saying: “Don’t you agree that what really counts is what God says?” Or you could say: “Did you know that the Bible discusses that very question?” If you are speaking to someone who does not have respect for the Bible, you may need to use a somewhat different introduction. You could say: “Let me share this ancient prophecy with you.” Or you might say: “The book that is the most widely distributed in human history says this . . . ”</p>
<p class="p12">In some instances, you may choose simply to paraphrase a text. Where possible, however, it is best to open the Bible itself and read what it says. Show the scripture to the person in his own copy of the Bible whenever this is practical. This direct use of the Bible often has a powerful effect on people.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Heb. 4:12</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(John 7:18)</strong> Whoever speaks of his own originality is seeking his own glory; but whoever seeks the glory of the one who sent him, this one is true and there is no unrighteousness in him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 3:4)</strong> Certainly not! But let God be found true, even if every man be found a liar, just as it is written: “That you might be proved righteous in your words and might win when you are being judged.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 4:12)</strong> For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul* and spirit,* and of joints from the marrow, and is able to discern thoughts and intentions of the heart.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***be p. 245 pars. 2-4 Illustrations From Familiar Situations***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p11">Are you as careful as Jesus and Paul were in selecting illustrations and examples to use in your teaching? Do you consider the background and the daily activity of your listeners? Of course, there have been changes in the world since the first century. Many people have access to world news by means of television. Situations in foreign lands are often familiar to them. Where that is the case, it certainly is not amiss to draw on such news items for illustrations. Nevertheless, the things that touch people most deeply usually involve their personal lives<wbr />—their home, their family, their work, the food they eat, the weather in their area.</p>
<p class="p12">If your illustration requires a lot of explanation, you may be talking about something that is not familiar to your audience. Such an illustration can easily overshadow the point of the instruction. As a result, the audience may remember your illustration but not the Scriptural truth that you were endeavoring to convey.</p>
<p class="p13">Instead of making complicated comparisons, Jesus used simple, everyday matters. He made use of little things to explain big things and easy things to make hard things plain. By making connections between everyday events and spiritual truths, Jesus helped people to grasp more readily the spiritual truths he was teaching and to remember these. What a fine example to follow!</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***be p. 238 pars. 3-5 Effective Use of Questions***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p18"><strong><em>To Draw Out Inner Feelings. </em></strong>When people answer questions, they do not always reveal how they really feel. They may simply give the answers that they think you want. Discernment is needed. (<span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Prov. 20:5</a>) As Jesus did, you might ask: “Do you believe this?”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">John 11:26</a>.</p>
<p class="p19">When many of Jesus’ disciples took offense at what he said and abandoned him, Jesus invited his apostles to express how they felt. He asked: “You do not want to go also, do you?” Peter put their feelings into words, saying: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life; and we have believed and come to know that you are the Holy One of God.” (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">John 6:67-69</a>) On another occasion, Jesus asked his disciples: “Who are <em>men </em>saying the Son of man is?” He followed this with a question that invited them to express what was in their own hearts. “You, though, who do <em>you </em>say I am?” In response, Peter said: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Matt. 16:13-16</a>.</p>
<p class="p20">When conducting a Bible study, you may find it beneficial to take a similar approach to certain issues. You might ask: “How do your classmates (or workmates) view this matter?” Then you might ask: “How do <em>you </em>feel about it?” When you know a person’s true feelings, this makes it possible for you as a teacher to be of the greatest help.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 20:5)</strong> The thoughts* of a man’s heart are like deep waters, But the discerning man draws them out.</p><p></p><p>Or “intentions.” Lit., “counsel.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(John 11:26)</strong> and everyone who is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all. Do you believe this?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(John 6:67-69)</strong> So Jesus said to the Twelve: “You do not want to go also, do you?” <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>Simon Peter answered him: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>We have believed and have come to know that you are the Holy One of God.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 16:13-16)</strong> When he had come into the region of Caes·a·reʹa Phi·lipʹpi, Jesus asked his disciples: “Who are men saying the Son of man is?” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>They said: “Some say John the Baptist, others E·liʹjah, and still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Simon Peter answered: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016329.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***be p. 259 par. 1 Effort to Reach the Heart***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p12">Well-chosen questions can help you to draw out what is in someone’s heart. You might ask: “How do you feel about . . . ?” “What convinced you that . . . ?” “How would you react if . . . ?” Yet, be careful not to barrage people with questions. You might tactfully preface your questions with, “Do you mind if I ask . . . ?” Discovering what is in the heart is a painstaking task that cannot be rushed. In most cases trust must be built up over a period of time before a person is willing to reveal his inmost feelings. Even then, care must be exercised so that the person does not feel that you are asking about things that are not your business.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">1 Pet. 4:15</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 4:15)</strong> However, let none of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or a wrongdoer or a busybody in other people’s matters.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
