<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 September 19-25</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016327.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 135:1-141:10)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Praise Jah!* Praise the name of Jehovah; Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You who are standing in the house of Jehovah, In the courtyards of the house of our God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Praise Jah, for Jehovah is good. Sing praises* to his name, for it is pleasant.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For Jah has chosen Jacob for himself, Israel for his special property.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For I well know that Jehovah is great; Our Lord is greater than all other gods.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah does everything he pleases to do In heaven and on earth, in the seas and all the depths.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He causes clouds* to ascend from the ends of the earth; He makes lightning for* the rain; He brings the wind out of his storehouses.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He struck down the firstborn of Egypt, Both man and beast.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He sent signs and miracles among you, O Egypt, Against Pharʹaoh and all his servants. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He struck down many nations And killed mighty kings <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>—Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, Og the king of Baʹshan, And all the kingdoms of Caʹnaan. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He gave their land as an inheritance, An inheritance to Israel his people. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, your name endures forever. O Jehovah, your fame* endures for all generations. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will defend* his people, And he will feel compassion* for his servants. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The idols of the nations are silver and gold, The work of human hands. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; Eyes, but they cannot see; <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Ears they have, but they cannot hear. There is no breath in their mouth. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The people who make them will become just like them, As will all those who trust in them. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O house of Israel, praise Jehovah. O house of Aaron, praise Jehovah. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>O house of Leʹvi, praise Jehovah. You who fear Jehovah, praise Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised from Zion, The One residing in Jerusalem. Praise Jah! </p><p><strong>136 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Give thanks to the God of gods, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Give thanks to the Lord of lords, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He alone does great wonders, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He skillfully made* the heavens, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He spread out the earth over the waters, For his loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He made the great lights, For his loyal love endures forever,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The sun to rule over the day, For his loyal love endures forever,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The moon and the stars to rule over the night, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He struck down Egypt’s firstborn, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>He brought Israel out from their midst, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>With a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the Red Sea in two,* For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He caused Israel to pass through the middle of it, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He shook off Pharʹaoh and his army into the Red Sea, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He led his people through the wilderness, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He struck down great kings, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He killed mighty kings, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Siʹhon the king of the Amʹor·ites, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>And Og the king of Baʹshan, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He gave their land as an inheritance, For his loyal love endures forever, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>An inheritance to Israel his servant, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He remembered us when we were low, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He kept rescuing us from our adversaries, For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>He gives food to every living thing,* For his loyal love endures forever. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Give thanks to the God of the heavens, For his loyal love endures forever. </p><p><strong>137 </strong>By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat. We wept when we remembered Zion.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Upon the poplar trees in her* midst, We hung our harps.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For there our captors asked us for a song, Those mocking us wanted amusement: “Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>How can we sing the song of Jehovah On foreign soil?  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If I should forget you, O Jerusalem, Let my right hand be forgetful.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Let my tongue stick to my palate If I do not remember you, If I do not place Jerusalem above My greatest reasons for rejoicing.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Remember, O Jehovah, What the Eʹdom·ites said on the day Jerusalem fell: “Tear it down! Tear it down to its foundations!”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O daughter of Babylon, who is soon to be devastated, Happy will be the one who rewards you With the treatment you inflicted on us.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Happy will be the one who seizes your children And dashes them against the rocks. </p><p>Of David. <strong>138 </strong>I will praise you with all my heart. In the face of other gods, I will sing praises.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will bow down toward your holy temple,* And I will praise your name Because of your loyal love and your faithfulness. For you have magnified your saying and your name above everything else.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>On the day I called, you answered me; You made me bold* and strong.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>All the kings of the earth will praise you, O Jehovah, For they will have heard the promises you have spoken.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will sing about the ways of Jehovah, For the glory of Jehovah is great.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Though Jehovah is high, he takes note of the humble, But the haughty he knows only from a distance.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Even when I walk in the midst of danger, you will preserve me alive. You stretch out your hand against the anger of my enemies; Your right hand will save me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will accomplish all things in my behalf. O Jehovah, your loyal love endures forever; Do not forsake the works of your hands. </p><p>For the director. Of David. A melody. <strong>139 </strong>O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You observe* me when I travel and when I lie down; You are familiar with all my ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>There is not a word on my tongue, But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Behind and before me, you surround me; And you lay your hand upon me.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension.* It is too high for me to reach.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Where can I escape from your spirit, And where can I run away from your face?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there, And if I were to make my bed in the Grave,* look! you would be there.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If I would fly away with the wings of the dawn To reside by the most remote sea, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Even there your hand would lead me And your right hand would take hold of me. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!” Then the night around me would become light. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Even the darkness would not be too dark for you, But night would be as bright as the day; Darkness is the same as light to you. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For you produced my kidneys; You kept me screened off* in my mother’s womb. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know* this very well. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My bones were not hidden from you When I was made in secret, When I was woven in the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; All its parts were written in your book Regarding the days when they were formed, Before any of them existed. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them! <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O God, if only you would slay the wicked! Then the violent* men would depart from me, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Those who say things against you with evil intent;* They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah, And loathe those who revolt against you? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I have nothing but hatred for them; They have become real enemies to me. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious* thoughts. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>See whether there is in me any harmful way, And lead me in the way of eternity. </p><p>For the director. A melody of David. <strong>140 </strong>Rescue me, O Jehovah, from evil men; Protect me from violent men,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Those who scheme evil in their hearts And stir up conflict all day long.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They sharpen their tongue like that of a serpent; Venom of vipers is behind their lips. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Protect me, O Jehovah, from the hands of the wicked; Safeguard me from violent men, Those who scheme to trip me.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The haughty ones hide a trap for me; With ropes they spread out a net beside the path. They set snares for me. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I say to Jehovah: “You are my God. Listen, O Jehovah, to my pleas for help.”  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, my strong Savior, You shield my head in the day of battle.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not grant, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked. Do not let their plots succeed, so that they are not exalted. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>May the heads of those surrounding me Be covered with the evil spoken by their lips. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>May burning coals rain down on them. May they be hurled into the fire, Into deep pits,* never to rise again. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May the slanderer find no place on the earth.* May evil pursue men of violence and strike them down. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I know that Jehovah will defend the lowly And give justice to the poor. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely the righteous will give thanks to your name; The upright will dwell before your face.* </p><p>A melody of David. <strong>141 </strong>O Jehovah, I call on you. Come quickly to help me. Do pay attention when I call to you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May my prayer be as incense prepared before you, My uplifted hands like the evening grain offering.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Station a guard for my mouth, O Jehovah, Do set a watch over the door of my lips.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not let my heart incline to anything bad, To share in vile deeds with evil men; May I never feast on their delicacies.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love; Should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head, Which my head would never refuse. My prayer will continue even during their calamities.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Though their judges are thrown down from the cliff, The people will pay attention to my words, for they are pleasant.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Just as when someone plows and breaks up the soil, So our bones have been scattered at the mouth of the Grave.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But my eyes look to you, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. In you I have taken refuge. Do not take away my life.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Protect me from the jaws of the trap they have laid for me, From the snares of evildoers. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The wicked will fall into their own nets all together While I pass by safely.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “treasured possession.”</p><p>Or “vapors.”</p><p>Or possibly, “makes sluices for.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Or “plead the cause of.”</p><p>Or “feel regret.”</p><p>Or “made with understanding.”</p><p>Lit., “into pieces.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Referring to Babylon.</p><p>Or possibly, “wither.”</p><p>Or possibly, “In defiance of other gods, I will make music to you.”</p><p>Or “sanctuary.”</p><p>Or possibly, “you have magnified your saying above all your name.”</p><p>Or “bold in my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “measure.”</p><p>Or “is too amazing for me.”</p><p>Or “too much for me to fathom.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “wove me together.”</p><p>Or “My soul knows.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p><p>Or “bloodguilty.”</p><p>Or “according to their idea.”</p><p>Or “disquieting.”</p><p>Or “Into watery pits.”</p><p>Or “in the land.”</p><p>Or “in your presence.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “pour out my soul.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016327.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Ps. 139:1-24)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You observe* me when I travel and when I lie down; You are familiar with all my ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>There is not a word on my tongue, But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Behind and before me, you surround me; And you lay your hand upon me.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension.* It is too high for me to reach.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Where can I escape from your spirit, And where can I run away from your face?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there, And if I were to make my bed in the Grave,* look! you would be there.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If I would fly away with the wings of the dawn To reside by the most remote sea, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Even there your hand would lead me And your right hand would take hold of me. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!” Then the night around me would become light. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Even the darkness would not be too dark for you, But night would be as bright as the day; Darkness is the same as light to you. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For you produced my kidneys; You kept me screened off* in my mother’s womb. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know* this very well. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My bones were not hidden from you When I was made in secret, When I was woven in the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; All its parts were written in your book Regarding the days when they were formed, Before any of them existed. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them! <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O God, if only you would slay the wicked! Then the violent* men would depart from me, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Those who say things against you with evil intent;* They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah, And loathe those who revolt against you? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I have nothing but hatred for them; They have become real enemies to me. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious* thoughts. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>See whether there is in me any harmful way, And lead me in the way of eternity.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “measure.”</p><p>Or “is too amazing for me.”</p><p>Or “too much for me to fathom.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “wove me together.”</p><p>Or “My soul knows.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p><p>Or “bloodguilty.”</p><p>Or “according to their idea.”</p><p>Or “disquieting.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 59 To God We Are Dedicated!***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 59</p>
<h1><strong>To God We Are Dedicated!</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">Matthew 16:24</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. To Christ, by our God, Jehovah, we have been drawn</p>
<p class="p5">To be his disciples from now on.</p>
<p class="p6">From Jehovah’s lofty throne,</p>
<p class="p7">Light of truth has brightly shone.</p>
<p class="p8">In our hearts, our faith has grown;</p>
<p class="p9">Ourselves we agree to disown.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p10">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p11">To God we are dedicated; This is our choice.</p>
<p class="p12">In him and in Jesus we now rejoice<em>.</em></p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. In prayer we have come before Jehovah to say</p>
<p class="p14">We’ll serve him forever and obey.</p>
<p class="p15">It’s a joy beyond compare,</p>
<p class="p16">One that we most gladly share,</p>
<p class="p17">As Jehovah’s name we bear,</p>
<p class="p18">And news of his Kingdom declare.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p19">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p20">To God we are dedicated; This is our choice.</p>
<p class="p21">In him and in Jesus we now rejoice<em>.</em></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p22">(See also <span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Ps. 43:3;</a><span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10"> 107:22;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> John 6:44</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Matt. 16:24)</strong></a> Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake* and keep following me.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 43:3)</strong></a> Send out your light and your truth. May these lead me; May they guide me to your holy mountain and to your grand tabernacle.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 107:22)</strong></a> Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving And declare his works with a joyful cry.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(John 6:44)</strong></a> No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him, and I will resurrect him on the last day.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w07 6/15 p. 21 We Are “Wonderfully Made”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 1. Why do many thinking people credit God for earth’s wonders?</p>
<p class="p3">THE natural world is filled with wonderful creations. How did they come to be? Some believe that the answer can be found without referring to an intelligent Creator. Others hold that arbitrarily ruling out a Creator limits our ability to understand nature. They believe that earth’s creatures are far too complex, too varied and, you might say, too wonderful to have originated by chance. To many people, some scientists included, the evidence shows that the universe had a wise, powerful, and benevolent Maker.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a></p>
<p class="qu"> 2. What moved David to praise Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>King David of ancient Israel was one who was convinced that a Maker deserves praise for His wonderful creations. Although David lived long before today’s scientific era, he perceived that he was surrounded by marvelous examples of God’s creative work. David needed only to consider his own makeup to be profoundly awed by God’s creative ability. “I shall laud you because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made,” he wrote. “Your works are wonderful, as my soul is very well aware.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Psalm 139:14</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">3, 4. Why is it important for each of us to think seriously about Jehovah’s works?</p>
<p class="p5"><sup>3 </sup>David gained this strong conviction by thinking seriously. Today, school curriculums and the media are replete with faith-destroying theories about man’s origin. For us to have faith like that of David, we too must think seriously. We cannot afford to let others think for us, especially on such fundamental issues as the existence and role of a Creator.</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>4 </sup>Moreover, contemplating Jehovah’s works strengthens our appreciation for him and gives us confidence in his promises for the future. That, in turn, can motivate us to get to know Jehovah even better and to serve him. Let us therefore consider how modern science has confirmed David’s conclusion that we are “wonderfully made.”</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 139:14)</strong> I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know* this very well.</p><p></p><p>Or “My soul knows.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> See the June 22, 2004, issue of <em>Awake!</em> published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w07 6/15 pp. 22-23 We Are “Wonderfully Made”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">7, 8. (a) Describe an unborn baby’s early growth. (b) In what way is a developing baby “woven in the lowest parts of the earth”?</p>
<p class="p10"><sup>7 </sup><em>“My bones were not hidden from you when I was made in secret, when I was woven in the lowest parts of the earth.” </em>(<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Psalm 139:15</a>) The original cell divided, and the new cells continued to divide. Soon the cells began to differentiate, or specialize, to become nerve cells, muscle cells, skin cells, and so forth. Cells of the same type grouped together to form tissues and then organs. For instance, during the third week from conception, you began to develop a skeletal system. By the time you were just seven weeks old and only about an inch <strong>[2.5 cm] </strong>long, early forms of all 206 of your adult bones were in place, although they had not yet ossified, or turned into hard bone.</p>
<p class="p11"><sup>8 </sup>This amazing developmental process took place within your mother’s womb, hidden from human sight as if buried deep in the earth. Indeed, much about how we develop remains unknown to man. What, for example, activated specific genes in your cells to set in motion the process of differentiation? Science may eventually find out, but as David next observed, our Maker<wbr />—Jehovah—<wbr />has fully understood it all along.</p>
<p class="qu">9, 10. How is the formation of an embryo’s parts “down in writing” in God’s “book”?</p>
<p class="p12"><sup>9 </sup><em>“Your eyes saw even the embryo of me, and in your book all its parts were down in writing, as regards the days when they were formed and there was not yet one among them.” </em>(<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Psalm 139:16</a>) Your first cell contained the complete plan for your entire body. This plan guided your development during your nine months in the womb before birth and then through more than two decades of growth to adulthood. During this time, your body passed through many stages, all directed by the information programmed into that original cell.</p>
<p class="p13"><sup>10 </sup>David had no knowledge of cells and genes, being without even a microscope. But he correctly discerned that the development of his own body attested to advance planning. David may have had some knowledge of how embryos develop, so he could reason that each step must take place according to a preexisting design and timetable. In poetic language, he described this design as being “down in writing” in God’s “book.”</p>
<p class="qu">11. How did we come to have our physical characteristics?</p>
<p class="p14"><sup>11 </sup>Today, it is known that characteristics you inherited from your parents and forebears<wbr />—such as your height, facial features, eye and hair color, and thousands of other traits—<wbr />were determined by your genes. Each of your cells contains tens of thousands of genes, and each gene is part of a long chain made of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Building instructions for your body are “written” in the chemical structure of your personal DNA. Every time your cells divide<wbr />—to make new cells or to replace old cells—<wbr />your DNA passes those instructions on, thereby keeping you alive and maintaining your basic appearance. What an outstanding example of the power and wisdom of our heavenly Maker!</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 139:15)</strong> My bones were not hidden from you When I was made in secret, When I was woven in the depths of the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 139:16)</strong> Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; All its parts were written in your book Regarding the days when they were formed, Before any of them existed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w07 6/15 p. 23 We Are “Wonderfully Made”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p15"><strong>Our Unique Mind</strong></p>
<p class="qu">12. What especially sets humans apart from animals?</p>
<p class="p16"><sup>12 </sup><em>“So, to me how precious your thoughts are! O God, how much does the grand sum of them amount to! Were I to try to count them, they are more than even the grains of sand.” </em>(<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Psalm 139:17, 18a</a>) Animals too are wonderfully made, and some possess certain senses and abilities that exceed those of humans. But God gave humans mental faculties that far surpass those of any animal. “As similar as we humans are in many ways to other species, we are unique among the earth’s life forms in our ability to use language and thought,” notes one science textbook. “We are also unique in our profound curiosity about ourselves: How are we put together physically? How were we formed?” These are questions that David likewise pondered.</p>
<p class="qu">13. (a) How could David meditate on God’s thoughts? (b) How can we follow David’s example?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>13 </sup>Most important, in contrast with animals, we are unique in our ability to contemplate God’s thoughts.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> This special gift is one of the ways that we are made “in God’s image.” (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Genesis 1:27</a>) David made good use of this gift. He meditated on the evidence of God’s existence and the good qualities reflected in the earth around him. David also had the early books of the Holy Scriptures, which contain revelations by God about himself and his works. These inspired writings helped David to understand God’s thoughts, personality, and purpose. Meditating on the Scriptures, on creation, and on God’s dealings with him moved David to praise his Maker.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 139:17, 18)</strong> So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them! <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.*</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 1:27)</strong> And God went on to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> The words of David at <span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Psalm 139:18b</a> seem to mean that if he spent all day until he fell asleep at night counting Jehovah’s thoughts, upon awakening in the morning, he would still have more to count.</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Ps. 139:18)</strong></a> If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.*</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 16 par. 8 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p42"><span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18"><strong>139:17, 18</strong></a><strong>. </strong>Has knowledge of Jehovah become pleasurable to us? (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Proverbs 2:10</a>) If so, we have found an inexhaustible fountain of delight. Jehovah’s thoughts “are more than even the grains of sand.” There will always be more to learn about him.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 139:17, 18)</strong> So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them! <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.*</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 2:10)</strong> When wisdom enters your heart And knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***it-1 p. 783 Exodus***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p66">So by a spectacular display of power Jehovah exalted his name and delivered Israel. Safe on the E shore of the Red Sea, Moses led the sons of Israel in a song, while his sister Miriam, the prophetess, took a tambourine in her hand and led all the women with tambourines and in dances, responding in song to the men. (<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Ex 15:1,</a><span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21"> 20, 21</a>) A complete separation of Israel from their foes had been effected. When they went out from Egypt they were not allowed to suffer harm from man or beast; no dog even snarled at the Israelites or moved its tongue against them. (<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Ex 11:7</a>) While the Exodus narrative does not mention that Pharaoh personally went into the sea with his military forces and was destroyed, <span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Psalm 136:15</a> does state that Jehovah “shook off Pharaoh and his military force into the Red Sea.”</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Ex. 15:1)</strong></a> At that time Moses and the Israelites sang this song to Jehovah: “Let me sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Ex. 15:20, 21)</strong></a> Then Mirʹi·am the prophetess, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women followed her with tambourines and with dances. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Mirʹi·am sang in response to the men: “Sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Ex. 11:7)</strong></a> But not even a dog will bark* at the Israelites, at the men or their livestock, so that you may know that Jehovah can make a distinction between the Egyptians and the Israelites.’</p><p></p><p>Lit., “sharpen its tongue.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(Ps. 136:15)</strong></a> He shook off Pharʹaoh and his army into the Red Sea, For his loyal love endures forever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w15 4/15 p. 31 Why Disfellowshipping Is a Loving Provision***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p20">Love and firmness are needed to produce the desired result. “Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love,” said the psalmist David, and “should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head.” (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Ps. 141:5</a>) To illustrate: Imagine a hiker who succumbs to exhaustion on a cold winter day. He begins to suffer from hypothermia, and he feels drowsy. If he falls asleep in the snow, he will die. While waiting for a rescue party, his companion occasionally slaps him in the face to keep him awake. The slap may sting, but it could well save his life. Similarly, David recognized that a righteous person might need to give him painful correction for his own good.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Ps. 141:5)</strong></a> Should the righteous one strike me, it would be an act of loyal love; Should he reprove me, it would be like oil on my head, Which my head would never refuse. My prayer will continue even during their calamities.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 16 What Does the Bible Say?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl"><strong>What Does the Bible Say?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>What is the Kingdom of God?</strong></h2>
<p class="p3"><strong>SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE </strong>that it represents the reign of God in a person’s heart; others think that it is the product of human efforts to bring world peace and brotherhood. What do you think?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p5">“The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms.” (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Daniel 2:44</a>) God’s Kingdom is a real government.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  The Kingdom of God rules from heaven.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Matthew 10:7;</a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> Luke 10:9</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  God uses the Kingdom to accomplish his will in heaven and on earth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Matthew 6:10</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>When will God’s Kingdom come?</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>WHAT WOULD YOU SAY?</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p11">  No one knows</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p12">  Soon</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p13">  Never</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p14"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p15">“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.” (<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Matthew 24:14</a>) Once the good news has been fully preached, the Kingdom will come to bring the present wicked system to an end.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p17">  No one on earth knows exactly when God’s Kingdom will come.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Matthew 24:36</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">  Bible prophecy shows that the Kingdom will come soon.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Matthew 24:3,</a><span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32"> 7,</a><span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33"> 12</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="relatedContent"><p class="p19">For more information, see chapter 8 of this book, <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em><em>, </em>published by Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
<p class="p20">Also available at www.jw.org</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong></a> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:7)</strong></a> As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Luke 10:9)</strong></a> and cure the sick ones in it and tell them: ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:10)</strong></a> Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong></a> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:36)</strong></a> “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong></a> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:7)</strong></a> “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:12)</strong></a> and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 16 What Does the Bible Say?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl"><strong>What Does the Bible Say?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>What is the Kingdom of God?</strong></h2>
<p class="p3"><strong>SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE </strong>that it represents the reign of God in a person’s heart; others think that it is the product of human efforts to bring world peace and brotherhood. What do you think?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p5">“The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms.” (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Daniel 2:44</a>) God’s Kingdom is a real government.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  The Kingdom of God rules from heaven.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Matthew 10:7;</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> Luke 10:9</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  God uses the Kingdom to accomplish his will in heaven and on earth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Matthew 6:10</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>When will God’s Kingdom come?</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>WHAT WOULD YOU SAY?</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p11">  No one knows</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p12">  Soon</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p13">  Never</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p14"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p15">“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.” (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Matthew 24:14</a>) Once the good news has been fully preached, the Kingdom will come to bring the present wicked system to an end.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p17">  No one on earth knows exactly when God’s Kingdom will come.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Matthew 24:36</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">  Bible prophecy shows that the Kingdom will come soon.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Matthew 24:3,</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> 7,</a><span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42"> 12</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="relatedContent"><p class="p19">For more information, see chapter 8 of this book, <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em><em>, </em>published by Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
<p class="p20">Also available at www.jw.org</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong></a> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:7)</strong></a> As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Luke 10:9)</strong></a> and cure the sick ones in it and tell them: ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:10)</strong></a> Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong></a> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:36)</strong></a> “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong></a> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:7)</strong></a> “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:12)</strong></a> and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***fg lesson 8***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p15">Satan uses his power to promote immoral, harmful practices. When we reject such practices, some friends and relatives may ridicule or oppose us. (<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">1 Peter 4:3, 4</a>) So we face a choice. Will we associate with people who love God? Will we obey his wise and loving laws? If we do, we prove that Satan lied when he claimed that under pressure no one would do as God says.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44"><em>1 Corinthians 6:9, 10;</em></a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> <em>15:33</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 4:3, 4)</strong> For the time that has passed by is sufficient for you to have done the will of the nations when you carried on in acts of brazen conduct,* unbridled passions, overdrinking, wild parties,* drinking bouts, and lawless idolatries. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They are puzzled that you do not continue running with them in the same decadent course of debauchery, so they speak abusively of you.</p><p></p><p>Or “acts of shameless conduct.” Plural of the Greek <em>a·selʹgei·a. </em>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “revelries.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 6:9, 10)</strong> Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled.* Those who are sexually immoral,* idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality,* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers,* and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.</p><p></p><p>Or “deceived.”</p><p>See Glossary, “Sexual immorality.”</p><p>Or “men who have sex with men.” Lit., “men who lie with men.”</p><p>Or “the verbally abusive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 15:33)</strong> Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.*</p><p></p><p>Or “corrupt good morals.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***sn song 57 The Meditation of My Heart***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 57</p>
<h1><strong>The Meditation of My Heart</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Psalm 19:14</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. The meditation of my heart,</p>
<p class="p5">The thoughts I ponder through the day<wbr />—</p>
<p class="p6">May they be pleasing to you, Lord,</p>
<p class="p7">And keep me steadfast in your way.</p>
<p class="p8">When worries weigh upon my mind</p>
<p class="p9">And make me restless in the night,</p>
<p class="p10">Then may I meditate on you</p>
<p class="p11">And things I know to be upright.</p>
<p class="p12">2. Whatever things are chaste and true,</p>
<p class="p13">Whatever virtue there may be,</p>
<p class="p14">Whatever things well-spoken of<wbr />—</p>
<p class="p15">May thoughts of these bring peace to me.</p>
<p class="p16">How precious are your thoughts, O God!</p>
<p class="p17">Beyond all counting is their sum.</p>
<p class="p18">So may I ponder your own words,</p>
<p class="p19">Absorbed in them may I become.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p20">(See also <span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Ps. 49:3;</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> 63:6;</a><span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49"> 139:17,</a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> 23;</a><span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51"> Phil. 4:7, 8;</a><span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52"> 1 Tim. 4:15</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Ps. 19:14)</strong></a> May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart Be pleasing to you, O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Ps. 49:3)</strong></a> My own mouth will speak wisdom, And the meditation of my heart will show understanding.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Ps. 63:6)</strong></a> I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Ps. 139:17)</strong></a> So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(Ps. 139:23)</strong></a> Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious* thoughts.</p><p></p><p>Or “disquieting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Phil. 4:7, 8)</strong></a> and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers* by means of Christ Jesus. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste,* whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well-spoken-of, whatever things are virtuous, and whatever things are praiseworthy, continue considering* these things.</p><p></p><p>Or “your minds; your thoughts.”</p><p>Or “pure.”</p><p>Or “thinking about; meditating on.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 4:15)</strong></a> Ponder over* these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.</p><p></p><p>Or “Meditate on.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***bh p. 29 What Is God’s Purpose for the Earth?***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> 7. (a) Why did Adam and Eve die? (b) Why do all of Adam’s offspring grow old and die?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>By using lies and trickery, Satan the Devil caused Adam and Eve to disobey God. (<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Genesis 2:17;</a><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"> 3:6</a>) As a result, they eventually died, as God had said they would if they disobeyed. (<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Genesis 3:17-19</a>) Since Adam became imperfect when he sinned, all his offspring inherited sin from him. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"><strong>Romans 5:12</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>The situation might be illustrated with a pan used for baking bread. If the pan has a dent in it, what happens to each loaf of bread made in the pan? Each loaf has a dent, or an imperfection, in it. Similarly, each human has inherited a “dent” of imperfection from Adam. That is why all humans grow old and die.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Romans 3:23</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 2:17)</strong> But as for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad, you must not eat from it, for in the day you eat from it you will certainly die.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:6)</strong> Consequently, the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something desirable to the eyes, yes, the tree was pleasing to look at. So she began taking of its fruit and eating it. Afterward, she also gave some to her husband when he was with her, and he began eating it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:17-19)</strong> And to Adam* he said: “Because you listened to your wife’s voice and ate from the tree concerning which I gave you this command, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground on your account. In pain you will eat its produce all the days of your life. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It will grow thorns and thistles for you, and you must eat the vegetation of the field. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>In the sweat of your face you will eat bread* until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken. For dust you are and to dust you will return.”</p><p></p><p>Meaning “Earthling Man; Mankind; Humankind.”</p><p>Or “food.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 5:12)</strong> That is why, just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because they had all sinned—.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 3:23)</strong> For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***kr pp. 2-3 A Letter From the Governing Body***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1><strong>A Letter From the Governing Body</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p2">Dear Fellow Kingdom Publisher:</p>
<p class="p3">PICTURE yourself as a member of the Brooklyn Bethel family on Friday morning, October 2, 1914. You are seated at your usual place at the breakfast table, awaiting the arrival of Brother C. T. Russell. Suddenly the door to the dining room opens and Brother Russell appears. He pauses for a moment, as is his custom, and greets the Bethel family with a cheery “Good morning, all.” But then, instead of immediately taking his place at the head of the table, he claps his hands and makes a thrilling announcement: “The Gentile Times have ended; their kings have had their day!” You can hardly contain your joy<wbr />—you have been looking forward to this moment for a long time! Along with the rest of the Bethel family, you greet this exciting news with sustained, enthusiastic applause.</p>
<p class="p4">Many decades have passed since Brother Russell made that electrifying statement. What has the Kingdom accomplished since then? A great deal! Through the Kingdom arrangement, Jehovah has been progressively refining and training his people<wbr />—from just a few thousand in 1914 to more than seven-and-a-half million today. How many ways have you personally benefited from such training?</p>
<p class="p5">Today we often hear our brothers say, “Jehovah’s celestial chariot is on the move!” and that is true. However, the fact is that since 1914, the celestial chariot, depicting the invisible part of Jehovah’s organization, has been moving at an extremely brisk pace, as a careful reading of this publication will demonstrate. With a view to getting the good news preached worldwide, Kingdom publishers have used a variety of innovative methods, including newspapers, information marches, picture presentations, testimony cards, phonographs, radio, and even the Internet.</p>
<p class="p6">With Jehovah’s blessing on the work, we are now able to publish our attractive Bible literature in more than 670 languages and to offer it to everyone without charge. Self-sacrificing volunteers assist in the construction of Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, and branch facilities, both in prosperous lands and in lands with limited resources. And when disaster strikes, loving brothers and sisters rush to the aid of those in the affected areas, proving that they truly are “born for times of distress.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Prov. 17:17</a>.</p>
<p class="p7">At times, the clergy and other opposers frame “trouble in the name of the law,” but it is faith-strengthening to see how, time and again, their misguided efforts have turned out to be “for the advancement of the good news.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">Ps. 94:20;</a><span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60"> Phil. 1:12</a>.</p>
<p class="p8">It is an honor for us to be associated with you, our fellow “domestics.” Please know that we love all of you very much. It is our prayer that the contents of this publication will help you to appreciate your spiritual heritage as never before.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Matt. 24:45</a>.</p>
<p class="p9">With every good wish, we are</p>
<p class="p10">Your brothers,</p>
<p class="p11">Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Prov. 17:17)</strong></a> A true friend shows love at all times, And is a brother who is born for times of distress.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Ps. 94:20)</strong></a> Can a throne* of corruption be allied with you While it is framing trouble in the name of the law?*</p><p></p><p>Or “rulers; judges.”</p><p>Or “by decree.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Phil. 1:12)</strong></a> Now I want you to know, brothers, that my situation has actually turned out for the advancement of the good news,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:45)</strong></a> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***kr pp. 6-9 “Let Your Kingdom Come”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1, 2. </strong>What words did Jehovah himself speak in the hearing of three of Jesus’ apostles, and how did they respond?</p>
<p class="p5">IF Jehovah God himself directed you to do something, how would you respond? No matter what he asked, would you not be eager to heed his direction? Surely you would!</p>
<p class="p6"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sometime after the Passover of 32 C.E., three of Jesus’ apostles<wbr />—Peter, James, and John—<wbr />had just such an experience. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62"><strong>Matthew 17:1-5</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Gathered with their Master on “a lofty mountain,” they saw in vision a preview of Jesus as a glorious heavenly King. The vision seemed so real that Peter tried to take part in it. While Peter was speaking, a cloud formed over them. Then Peter and his associates plainly heard what only a handful of humans have ever been privileged to hear<wbr />—Jehovah’s own voice. After affirming that Jesus was his Son, Jehovah said pointedly: “Listen to him.” The apostles heeded that divine direction. They listened to what Jesus taught, and they urged others to do the same.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Acts 3:19-23;</a><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"> 4:18-20</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>3. </strong>Why does Jehovah want us to listen to his Son, and what subject do we thus do well to examine?</p>
<p class="p7"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Those words<wbr />—“Listen to him”—<wbr />were recorded in the Bible for our benefit. (<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Rom. 15:4</a>) Why? Because Jesus is Jehovah’s spokesman and every time Jesus opened his mouth to teach, he shared what his Father wanted us to know. (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">John 1:1,</a><span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67"> 14</a>) Since Jesus spoke more about God’s Kingdom, the heavenly Messianic government made up of Christ Jesus and his 144,000 corulers, than he did about any other subject, we do well to examine this vital subject carefully. (<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Rev. 5:9, 10;</a><span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69"> 14:1-3;</a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> 20:6</a>) First, though, let us examine why Jesus said so much about God’s Kingdom.</p>
<h2><strong>“Out of the Abundance of the Heart . . .”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>4. </strong>How did Jesus indicate that the Kingdom is close to his heart?</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The Kingdom is close to Jesus’ heart. Why can we say that? Because words are a window into the heart<wbr />—that is, our words reveal what is truly important to us. Jesus himself said: “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Matt. 12:34</a>) At every opportunity, Jesus opened his mouth to speak about the Kingdom. There are over 100 references to the Kingdom in the four Gospels, most of them in statements made by Jesus. He made the Kingdom the theme of his preaching, saying: “I must also declare the good news of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because for this I was sent.” (<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Luke 4:43</a>) Even after his resurrection, Jesus continued to speak about the Kingdom to his disciples. (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Acts 1:3</a>) Surely Jesus’ heart overflowed with appreciation for the Kingdom, impelling him to speak about it.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>5-7. </strong>(a) How do we know that the Kingdom is close to Jehovah’s heart? Illustrate. (b) How can we show that the Kingdom is close to our heart?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The Kingdom is close to Jehovah’s heart as well. How do we know that? Remember, Jehovah sent his only-begotten Son into the world; Jehovah is the source of everything that his Son said and taught. (<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">John 7:16;</a><span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75"> 12:49, 50</a>) Jehovah is also the source of everything that is recorded in the four Gospel accounts of Jesus’ life and ministry. Consider for a moment what that means.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p49">Each of us does well to ask, ‘Is God’s Kingdom close to my heart?’</p>
</div>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Imagine that you are putting together a family photo album. You have many photographs to choose from, but the album can hold only so many. What do you do? You choose which ones to include. In a sense, the Gospels are like a photo album that gives us a clear picture of Jesus. Jehovah did not inspire the Gospel writers to record everything that Jesus said and did while on earth. (<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">John 20:30;</a><span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77"> 21:25</a>) Instead, Jehovah’s spirit guided them in recording the words and deeds that help us to understand the purpose of Jesus’ ministry and what is most important to Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">2 Tim. 3:16, 17;</a><span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79"> 2 Pet. 1:21</a>) Since the Gospels are filled with Jesus’ teachings about God’s Kingdom, we may safely conclude that the Kingdom is close to Jehovah’s heart. Just think<wbr />—Jehovah wants us to know what his Kingdom is all about!</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Each of us does well to ask, ‘Is God’s Kingdom close to my heart?’ If it is, we will be eager to listen to what Jesus said and taught about that Kingdom<wbr />—its importance and how and when it will come.</p>
<h2><strong>“Let Your Kingdom Come”<wbr />—How?</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>8. </strong>How did Jesus sum up the importance of the Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Consider the model prayer. With eloquent simplicity, Jesus summed up the importance of the Kingdom, showing what it will accomplish. That prayer consists of seven petitions. The first three concern Jehovah’s purposes<wbr />—the sanctification of his name, the coming of his Kingdom, and the carrying out of his will on earth as in heaven. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"><strong>Matthew 6:9, 10</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Those three petitions are closely related. The Messianic Kingdom is the instrument through which Jehovah will sanctify his name and carry out his will.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>9, 10. </strong>(a) How will God’s Kingdom come? (b) What Bible promise do you long to see fulfilled?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How will God’s Kingdom come? When we pray, “Let your Kingdom come,” we are asking that the Kingdom take decisive action. When the Kingdom comes, it will exert its full power toward the earth. It will remove the present wicked system of things, including all man-made governments, and bring in a righteous new world. (<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Dan. 2:44;</a><span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82"> 2 Pet. 3:13</a>) Then, under Kingdom rule, the entire earth will become a paradise. (<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">Luke 23:43</a>) Those in God’s memory will be brought back to life and reunited with their loved ones. (<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">John 5:28, 29</a>) Obedient humans will reach perfection and enjoy endless life. (<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Rev. 21:3-5</a>) At last, earth will be in perfect harmony with heaven, reflecting the will of Jehovah God! Do you not long to see those Bible promises come true? Remember that every time you pray for God’s Kingdom to come, you are praying for those precious promises to be fulfilled.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>It is clear that God’s Kingdom has not yet “come” to fulfill the model prayer. After all, man-made governments are still ruling and the righteous new world is not yet here. But there is good news. God’s Kingdom has been established, as we will discuss in the next chapter. Let us now examine what Jesus said as to when the Kingdom would be established and when it would come.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 17:1-5)</strong> Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And he was transfigured before them; his face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant* as the light. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And look! there appeared to them Moses and E·liʹjah conversing with him. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, it is fine for us to be here. If you wish, I will erect three tents here, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>While he was still speaking, look! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and look! a voice out of the cloud said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved. Listen to him.”</p><p></p><p>Or “white.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Acts 3:19-23)</strong> “Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, so that seasons of refreshing may come from Jehovah himself* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>and he may send the Christ appointed for you, Jesus. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Heaven must hold this one within itself until the times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>In fact, Moses said: ‘Jehovah* your God will raise up for you from among your brothers a prophet like me. You must listen to whatever he tells you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Indeed, anyone* who does not listen to that Prophet will be completely destroyed from among the people.’</p><p></p><p>Lit., “from the face of Jehovah.” See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “any soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Acts 4:18-20)</strong> With that they called them and ordered them not to say anything at all or to teach on the basis of the name of Jesus. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But in reply Peter and John said to them: “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 15:4)</strong> For all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(John 1:1)</strong> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god.*</p><p></p><p>Or “was divine.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(John 1:14)</strong> So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father; and he was full of divine favor* and truth.</p><p></p><p>Or “of undeserved kindness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 5:9, 10)</strong> And they sing a new song, saying: “You are worthy to take the scroll and open its seals, for you were slaughtered and with your blood you bought people for God out of every tribe and tongue* and people and nation, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>and you made them to be a kingdom and priests to our God, and they are to rule as kings over the earth.”</p><p></p><p>Or “language.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 14:1-3)</strong> Then I saw, and look! the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him 144,000 who have his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I heard a sound coming out of heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder; and the sound that I heard was like singers who accompany themselves by playing on their harps. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And they are singing what seems to be a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and no one was able to master that song except the 144,000, who have been bought from the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 20:6)</strong> Happy and holy is anyone having part in the first resurrection; over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and they will rule as kings with him for the 1,000 years.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 12:34)</strong> Offspring of vipers, how can you speak good things when you are wicked? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Luke 4:43)</strong> But he said to them: “I must also declare the good news of the Kingdom of God to other cities, because for this I was sent.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Acts 1:3)</strong> After he had suffered, he showed himself alive to them by many convincing proofs. He was seen by them throughout 40 days, and he was speaking about the Kingdom of God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 7:16)</strong> Jesus, in turn, answered them and said: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him who sent me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 12:49, 50)</strong> For I have not spoken of my own initiative, but the Father who sent me has himself given me a commandment about what to say and what to speak. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>And I know that his commandment means everlasting life. So whatever I speak, I speak just as the Father has told me.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 20:30)</strong> To be sure, Jesus also performed many other signs before the disciples, which are not written down in this scroll.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 21:25)</strong> There are also, in fact, many other things that Jesus did, which if ever they were written in full detail, I suppose the world itself could not contain the scrolls written.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16, 17)</strong> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 1:21)</strong> For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were moved* by holy spirit.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “carried along; borne along.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:9, 10)</strong> “You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “be held sacred; be treated as holy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 3:13)</strong> But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Luke 23:43)</strong> And he said to him: “Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(John 5:28, 29)</strong> Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, and those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 21:3-5)</strong> With that I heard a loud voice from the throne say: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his people. And God himself will be with them. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>And the One seated on the throne said: “Look! I am making all things new.” Also he says: “Write, for these words are faithful* and true.”</p><p></p><p>Or “trustworthy.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016327.xhtml#pcitationsource17">^ <span id="pcitation17"></span><strong>***sn song 30 Jehovah Begins His Rule***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 30</p>
<h1><strong>Jehovah Begins His Rule</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Revelation 11:15</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. This is a glorious day. God’s rule is now under way.</p>
<p class="p5">He’s laid in Zion his Chief Cornerstone.</p>
<p class="p6">Let all now lift up the voice. Sing to our God, and rejoice.</p>
<p class="p7">Christ, Lord and Savior, has been placed upon His throne.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">What will you bring, Jehovah’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p10">Triumph of truth and righteousness.</p>
<p class="p11">And bring what else, Jehovah’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p12">Eternal life and happiness.</p>
<p class="p13">Praise the Universal Sov’reign</p>
<p class="p14">For his love and faithfulness.</p>
</div>
<p class="p15">2. Christ now in power is here, And Armageddon is near.</p>
<p class="p16">Satan’s old system will soon pass away.</p>
<p class="p17">Now is the season to preach. Many there are yet to reach;</p>
<p class="p18">Time for the meek to take their stand for Him today.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p19">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p20">What will you bring, Jehovah’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p21">Triumph of truth and righteousness.</p>
<p class="p22">And bring what else, Jehovah’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p23">Eternal life and happiness.</p>
<p class="p24">Praise the Universal Sov’reign</p>
<p class="p25">For his love and faithfulness.</p>
</div>
<p class="p26">3. God’s reigning Ruler we prize. Wondrous he is in our eyes.</p>
<p class="p27">He comes in God’s name; we bow to our King.</p>
<p class="p28">Enter the grand temple gate; God’s favor now supplicate.</p>
<p class="p29">Soon dawns that day when he rules over ev’rything.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p30">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p31">What will you bring, Jehovah’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p32">Triumph of truth and righteousness.</p>
<p class="p33">And bring what else, Jehovah’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p34">Eternal life and happiness.</p>
<p class="p35">Praise the Universal Sov’reign</p>
<p class="p36">For his love and faithfulness.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p37">(See also <span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">2 Sam. 7:22;</a><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"> Dan. 2:44;</a><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"> Rev. 7:15</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <strong>(Rev. 11:15)</strong></a> The seventh angel blew his trumpet. And there were loud voices in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <strong>(2 Sam. 7:22)</strong></a> That is why you are truly great, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah. There is no one like you, and there is no God except you; everything we have heard with our ears confirms this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong></a> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(Rev. 7:15)</strong></a> That is why they are before the throne of God, and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple; and the One seated on the throne will spread his tent over them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
