<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 September 12-18</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016325.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 120:0-134:3)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A Song of the Ascents.* <strong>120 </strong>I called to Jehovah in my distress, And he answered me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, rescue me* from lying lips And from the deceitful tongue.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>What will He do to you, and how will He punish you,* You deceitful tongue?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With sharp arrows of a warrior And burning coals of broomwood.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech! I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have* been dwelling far too long With those who hate peace.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I am for peace, but when I speak, They are for war. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>121 </strong>I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you in all you do* From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>122 </strong>I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And now our feet are standing Within your gates, O Jerusalem.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jerusalem is built as a city That is joined together as one.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The tribes have gone up to it, The tribes of Jah,* According to the reminder to Israel, To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For thrones for judgment were set up there, Thrones of the house of David.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Ask for the peace of Jerusalem. Those who love you, O city, will be secure.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>May peace continue within your ramparts,* Security within your fortified towers.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say: “May there be peace within you.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God, I will seek good for you. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>123 </strong>To you I raise my eyes, You who are enthroned in the heavens.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress, So our eyes look to Jehovah our God Until he shows us favor.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor, For we have had our full share of contempt.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have had our full share of* ridicule from the self-assured And the contempt of the arrogant. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>124 </strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us When men rose up to attack us,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then they would have swallowed us up alive When their anger was burning against us.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then the waters would have washed us away, The torrent would have swept over us.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, For he has not given us as prey to their teeth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>We are* like a bird that escaped From the hunter’s trap; The trap was broken, And we escaped.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Our help is in the name of Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>125 </strong>Those who trust in Jehovah Are like Mount Zion, which cannot be shaken But endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Just as mountains surround Jerusalem, So Jehovah surrounds his people From now on and forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous, So that the righteous do not turn to doing* what is wrong.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good, To those who are upright in heart.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>126 </strong>When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion, We thought we were dreaming.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At that time our mouth was filled with laughter And our tongue with a joyful shout. At that time they said among the nations: “Jehovah has done great things for them.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah has done great things for us, And we are overjoyed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do gather back* our captives, O Jehovah, Like streams in the Negʹeb.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Those sowing seed with tears Will reap with a joyful shout.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The one who does go out, though weeping, Carrying his bag of seed, Will surely return with a joyful shout, Carrying in his sheaves. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of Solomon. <strong>127 </strong>Unless Jehovah builds the house, It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, It is in vain that the guard stays awake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is in vain that you rise up early, That you stay up late, That you toil for your food, Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>128 </strong>Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, Who walks in His ways.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house; Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! That is how the man who fears Jehovah Will be blessed.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>129 </strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me; But they have not defeated me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Plowmen have plowed across my back; They have made their furrows long.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jehovah is righteous; He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace, All those who hate Zion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will become like grass on the rooftops That withers before it is pulled up,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>That cannot fill the reaper’s hand Nor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you; We bless you in the name of Jehovah.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>130 </strong>From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, hear my voice. May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>If errors were what you watch,* O Jah,* Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I hope in Jehovah, my whole being* hopes in him; I wait for his word.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I eagerly wait* for Jehovah, More than watchmen wait for the morning, Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah, For Jehovah is loyal in his love, And he has great power to redeem.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will redeem Israel from all their errors. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>131 </strong>O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, Nor are my eyes lofty; Nor do I aspire to things too great, Or to things that are beyond me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>No, but I have calmed and quieted my soul* Like a weaned child with its mother; I am* contented like a weaned child.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let Israel wait for Jehovah From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>132 </strong>O Jehovah, remember David And all his suffering;  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>How he swore to Jehovah, How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob:  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“I will not go into my tent, my home. I will not lie upon my couch, my bed;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will not allow my eyes to sleep, Nor my eyelids to slumber  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Until I find a place for Jehovah, A fine residence* for the Powerful One of Jacob.”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah; We found it in the fields of the forest.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let us come into his residence;* Let us bow down at his footstool.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place, You and the Ark of your strength.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>May your priests be clothed with righteousness, And may your loyal ones shout joyfully. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the sake of David your servant, Do not reject* your anointed one. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn to David; He will surely not go back on his word: “One of your offspring,* I will place on your throne. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If your sons keep my covenant And my reminders that I teach them, Their sons too Will sit on your throne forever.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For Jehovah has chosen Zion; He has desired it for his dwelling place: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“This is my resting-place forever; Here I will dwell, for this is my desire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will richly bless it with provisions; I will satisfy its poor with bread. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Its priests I will clothe with salvation, And its loyal ones will shout joyfully. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>There I will make the strength* of David grow. I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>I will clothe his enemies with shame, But the crown* on his head will flourish.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>133 </strong>Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>134 </strong>Praise Jehovah, All you servants of Jehovah, You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Raise your hands in holiness* And praise Jehovah.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth, Bless you from Zion.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “and what will He add to you?”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “totter.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “your going out and your coming in.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “fortified walls.”</p><p>Or “Our soul has had more than enough.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “Our soul is.”</p><p>Or “turn their hands to.”</p><p>Or “restore.”</p><p>Or “wadis in the south.”</p><p>Or “Children.”</p><p>Or “keep track of.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul eagerly waits.”</p><p>Or “myself.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Or “A grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Or “his grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Lit., “turn back the face of.”</p><p>Lit., “of the fruit of your womb.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “diadem.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in the sanctuary.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016325.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Pss. 127:1-129:8)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>Unless Jehovah builds the house, It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, It is in vain that the guard stays awake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is in vain that you rise up early, That you stay up late, That you toil for your food, Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>128 </strong>Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, Who walks in His ways.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house; Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! That is how the man who fears Jehovah Will be blessed.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>129 </strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me; But they have not defeated me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Plowmen have plowed across my back; They have made their furrows long.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jehovah is righteous; He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace, All those who hate Zion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will become like grass on the rooftops That withers before it is pulled up,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>That cannot fill the reaper’s hand Nor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you; We bless you in the name of Jehovah.”</p><p></p><p>Or “Children.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 33 Fear Them Not!***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 33</p>
<h1><strong>Fear Them Not!</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">Matthew 10:28</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Ever onward, O my people,</p>
<p class="p5">Let the Kingdom tidings go.</p>
<p class="p6">Tremble not before our foe.</p>
<p class="p7">Let all lovers of truth know</p>
<p class="p8">That my reigning Son, Christ Jesus,</p>
<p class="p9">To the earth has cast the foe,</p>
<p class="p10">Soon to bind the Devil, Satan,</p>
<p class="p11">Letting all his victims go.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">Fear them not, O my beloved,</p>
<p class="p14">Though their boasting threats may fly.</p>
<p class="p15">I will keep my faithful servant</p>
<p class="p16">As the apple of my eye.</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. Even though your foes are many,</p>
<p class="p18">Though they threaten and revile,</p>
<p class="p19">Though they flatter and they smile,</p>
<p class="p20">To mislead and to beguile.</p>
<p class="p21">Fear them not, my faithful warriors,</p>
<p class="p22">Nor their persecution’s heat,</p>
<p class="p23">For I will preserve the faithful</p>
<p class="p24">Till the vict’ry is complete.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p25">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p26">Fear them not, O my beloved,</p>
<p class="p27">Though their boasting threats may fly.</p>
<p class="p28">I will keep my faithful servant</p>
<p class="p29">As the apple of my eye.</p>
</div>
<p class="p30">3. Never fear you are forgotten;</p>
<p class="p31">I am still your strength and shield.</p>
<p class="p32">Though you die upon the field,</p>
<p class="p33">Even death to me will yield.</p>
<p class="p34">Fear them not who kill the body</p>
<p class="p35">But cannot destroy the soul.</p>
<p class="p36">To the end may you be faithful;</p>
<p class="p37">I will bring you to your goal!</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p38">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p39">Fear them not, O my beloved,</p>
<p class="p40">Though their boasting threats may fly.</p>
<p class="p41">I will keep my faithful servant</p>
<p class="p42">As the apple of my eye.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p43">(See also <span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Deut. 32:10;</a><span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10"> Neh. 4:14;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> Ps. 59:1;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 83:2, 3</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:28)</strong></a> And do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul;* rather, fear him who can destroy both soul and body in Ge·henʹna.*</p><p></p><p>Or “life,” that is, life prospects.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Deut. 32:10)</strong></a> He found him in a wilderness land And in an empty, howling desert. He protectively encircled him, took care of him, And safeguarded him as the pupil of his eye.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Neh. 4:14)</strong></a> When I saw their fear, I immediately rose and said to the nobles and the deputy rulers and the rest of the people: “Do not be afraid of them. Remember Jehovah, who is great and awe-inspiring; and fight for your brothers, your sons and daughters, your wives and homes.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 59:1)</strong></a> Rescue me from my enemies, O my God; Protect me from those rising up against me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 83:2, 3)</strong></a> For look! your enemies are in an uproar; Those who hate you act arrogantly.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>With cunning they secretly plot against your people; They conspire against your treasured ones.*</p><p></p><p>Or “raise their heads.”</p><p>Lit., “concealed ones.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w04 12/15 p. 12 Jehovah Is Our Helper***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>An Unfailing Source of Help</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 3. To which mountains may the psalmist have raised his eyes, and why?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>3 </sup>The psalmist began by pointing to Jehovah’s creatorship as a basis for confidence: “I shall raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come? My help is from Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth.” (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Psalm 121:1, 2</a>) The psalmist did not raise his eyes to just any mountain. When these words were recorded, Jehovah’s temple was situated in Jerusalem. That city, located high in the mountains of Judah, was Jehovah’s figurative place of dwelling. (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Psalm 135:21</a>) The psalmist may have raised his eyes to the mountains of Jerusalem on which Jehovah’s temple was built, confidently looking to Jehovah for help. Why was the psalmist so sure that Jehovah could help him? Because He is “the Maker of heaven and earth.” In effect, the psalmist was saying, ‘Surely there is nothing that can prevent the all-powerful Creator from helping me!’<wbr />—<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Isaiah 40:26</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 121:1, 2)</strong> I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 135:21)</strong> May Jehovah be praised from Zion, The One residing in Jerusalem. Praise Jah!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 40:26)</strong> “Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number; He calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, Not one of them is missing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w04 12/15 pp. 12-13 Jehovah Is Our Helper***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 4. How did the psalmist show that Jehovah is ever alert to the needs of his people, and why is that a comforting thought?</p>
<p class="p7"><sup>4 </sup>The psalmist next explained that Jehovah is ever alert to the needs of his servants: “He cannot possibly allow your foot to totter. The One guarding you cannot possibly be drowsy. Look! He will not be drowsy nor go to sleep, he that is guarding Israel.” (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Psalm 121:3, 4</a>) It is not possible for God to allow those trusting in him “to totter” or to experience a fall from which they cannot recover. (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Proverbs 24:16</a>) Why not? Because Jehovah is like a wide-awake shepherd guarding his sheep. Is that not a comforting thought? Not for a moment will he close his eyes to the needs of his people. Day and night they are the objects of his vigilance.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 121:3, 4)</strong> He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.</p><p></p><p>Or “totter.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 24:16)</strong> For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w04 12/15 p. 13 Jehovah Is Our Helper***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 5. Why is Jehovah said to be at the “right hand”?</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>Confident that Jehovah is the loyal Protector of his people, the psalmist wrote: “Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is your shade on your right hand. By day the sun itself will not strike you, nor the moon by night.” (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Psalm 121:5, 6</a>) For a traveler on foot in the Middle East, a place of shade would provide welcome protection from the blazing sun. Jehovah is like a shade to his people, protecting them from the scorching heat of calamity. Note that Jehovah is said to be at the “right hand.” In ancient warfare, the soldier’s right hand was to some extent unprotected by the shield, which was held in the left hand. A loyal friend might provide protection by standing and fighting at the soldier’s right. Like such a friend, Jehovah loyally stands beside his worshipers, ever ready to help them.</p>
<p class="qu">6, 7. (a) How does the psalmist assure us that Jehovah will never stop helping his people? (b) Why can we share the psalmist’s confidence?</p>
<p class="p9"><sup>6 </sup>Will Jehovah ever stop helping his people? The very notion is inconceivable. The psalmist concluded: “Jehovah himself will guard you against all calamity. He will guard your soul. Jehovah himself will guard your going out and your coming in from now on and to time indefinite.” (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Psalm 121:7, 8</a>) Note that the writer shifted the emphasis from the present to the future. Earlier, in <span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Ps 121 verse 5</a>, the psalmist said: “Jehovah <em>is </em>guarding you.” But in these verses, the psalmist wrote: “Jehovah himself <em>will </em>guard you.” True worshipers are thus assured that Jehovah’s help will extend into the future. No matter where they go, no matter what calamity they face, they will never be outside the reach of his helping hand.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Proverbs 12:21</a>.</p>
<p class="p10"><sup>7 </sup>Indeed, the writer of <span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Psalm 121</a> was confident that the almighty Creator watches over his servants with the gentleness of a caring shepherd and the vigilance of an alert guard. We have every reason to share the psalmist’s confidence, for Jehovah does not change. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Malachi 3:6</a>) Does this mean that we will always receive physical protection? No, but as long as we look to him as our Helper, he will safeguard us against all things that could bring us spiritual harm. It is only natural to ask, <em>‘How </em>does Jehovah help us?’ Let us examine four ways in which he does so. In this article, we will discuss how he aided his servants in Bible times. In the next article, we will consider how he helps his people today.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 121:5, 6)</strong> Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 121:7, 8)</strong> Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you in all you do* From now on and forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “your going out and your coming in.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 121:5)</strong> Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 12:21)</strong> No harm will befall the righteous one, But the wicked will have their fill of calamity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 121:0-8)</strong> A Song of the Ascents. <strong>121 </strong>I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you in all you do* From now on and forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “totter.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “your going out and your coming in.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:6)</strong> “For I am Jehovah; I do not change.* And you are sons of Jacob; you have not yet come to your finish.</p><p></p><p>Or “I have not changed.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 15 par. 4 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p31"><span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24"><strong>123:2</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—What is the point of the illustration about the eyes of servants? </strong>Servants and maidservants look toward the hand of a master or a mistress for two reasons: to determine his or her wishes and to receive protection and life’s necessities. Similarly, we look to Jehovah in order to discern his will and to gain his favor.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 123:2)</strong> As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress, So our eyes look to Jehovah our God Until he shows us favor.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 16 par. 3 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p37"><span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25"><strong>133:1-3</strong></a><strong>. </strong>The unity of Jehovah’s people is soothing, wholesome, and refreshing. We should not disrupt it by engaging in faultfinding, quarreling, or complaining.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 133:1-3)</strong> Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***fg lesson 8***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p12">Satan claimed that no one would serve Jehovah out of unselfish love. Would you like to disprove that lie? You can! God’s patience allows all of us to show whether we favor rule by God or rule by man. We indicate our choice by the way we live.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26"><em>Job 1:8-12;</em></a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> <em>Proverbs 27:11</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Job 1:8-12)</strong> And Jehovah said to Satan: “Have you taken note of* my servant Job? There is no one like him on the earth. He is an upright man of integrity,* fearing God and shunning what is bad.” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>At that Satan answered Jehovah: “Is it for nothing that Job has feared God? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Have you not put up a protective hedge around him and his house and everything he has? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his livestock has spread out in the land. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But, for a change, stretch out your hand and strike everything he has, and he will surely curse you to your very face.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah said to Satan: “Look! Everything that he has is in your hand.* Only do not lay your hand on the man himself!” So Satan went out from the presence* of Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “set your heart upon.”</p><p>Or “a blameless and upright man.”</p><p>Or “under your control.”</p><p>Lit., “face.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***sn song 114 God’s Own Book—A Treasure***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 114</p>
<h1><strong>God’s Own Book<wbr />—A Treasure</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Proverbs 2:1</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. There is a book that by its many pages,</p>
<p class="p5">Brings peace and joy and hope to humankind.</p>
<p class="p6">Its wondrous thoughts are charged with such great power;</p>
<p class="p7">It brings life to the “dead,” sight to the “blind.”</p>
<p class="p8">That precious book is God’s own Holy Bible.</p>
<p class="p9">Its words were penned by men whom God inspired,</p>
<p class="p10">By men who truly loved their God Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p11">And by his holy spirit they were fired.</p>
<p class="p12">2. They wrote a record true of God’s creations,</p>
<p class="p13">How by his might this universe appeared.</p>
<p class="p14">They also told how man at first was sinless</p>
<p class="p15">But how his Paradise then disappeared.</p>
<p class="p16">They further told about a certain angel</p>
<p class="p17">Who challenged God and spurned his sov’reignty.</p>
<p class="p18">That challenge led to sin and man’s great sorrow,</p>
<p class="p19">But soon will come Jehovah’s victory.</p>
<p class="p20">3. Today we live in times of joy unbounded.</p>
<p class="p21">God’s Kingdom now is here with Christ as Lord.</p>
<p class="p22">This is the day Jehovah grants salvation</p>
<p class="p23">To all who come to him in full accord.</p>
<p class="p24">Within his book are found these cheerful tidings;</p>
<p class="p25">A sacred banquet feast on which to feed.</p>
<p class="p26">It offers peace beyond all human thinking;</p>
<p class="p27">This Living Treasure beckons all to read.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">2 Tim. 3:16;</a><span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30"> 2 Pet. 1:21</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Prov. 2:1)</strong></a> My son, if you accept my sayings And treasure up my commandments,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16)</strong></a> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness,</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 1:21)</strong></a> For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were moved* by holy spirit.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “carried along; borne along.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***ia pp. 205-208 Conclusion***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1><strong>Conclusion</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">“Be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">HEBREWS 6:12</a>.</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1, 2. </strong>Why is it vital that we build faith now? Illustrate.</p>
<p class="p3">FAITH. It is a beautiful word, one that names a very appealing quality. However, when we come across that word, we would do well to think of another one: “Urgent!” After all, if we do not have faith, we urgently need to acquire it. And if we do have faith, we urgently need to protect and nourish it. Why?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Imagine that you are traversing a vast desert. You are in critical need of water. When you find some, you have to protect it from the sun. Then you need to be able to replenish your supply so that it will last you until you arrive at your destination. Today, we all live in a spiritual desert, a world where genuine faith<wbr />—like that water—<wbr />is rare and tends to evaporate quickly unless it is protected and replenished. Our need is pressing; just as we cannot live without water, we cannot survive spiritually without faith.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Rom. 1:17</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>3. </strong>What has Jehovah provided to help us build faith, and what are two things that we need to remember to do?</p>
<p class="p5"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah knows how urgently we need faith, and he knows how hard it is to build and maintain faith today. No doubt, that is why he has provided examples for us to imitate. Jehovah inspired the apostle Paul to write: “Be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.” (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Heb. 6:12</a>) And that is why Jehovah’s organization has encouraged us to work hard to imitate the examples of faithful men and women, such as those we have considered in these pages. What, though, should we do now? Let us remember two things: (1) We need to keep strengthening our faith; (2) we need to keep our hope clearly in mind.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>4. </strong>How has Satan proved to be an enemy of faith, yet why should we not despair?</p>
<p class="p6"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong><em>Keep strengthening your faith. </em>Faith has a great enemy<wbr />—Satan. The ruler of the world has turned this system of things into a kind of desert that is hostile to faith. He is far stronger than we are. Should we despair of developing and strengthening our faith? Never! Jehovah is the great Friend of all who seek genuine faith. He assures us that with Him on our side, we can oppose the Devil and even send him fleeing from us! (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Jas. 4:7</a>) We oppose him by taking time each day to strengthen our faith and build it up. How?</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>5. </strong>How did the Bible’s faithful men and women acquire their faith? Explain.</p>
<p class="p7"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>As we have seen, the Bible’s men and women of faith were not born faithful. They became living proof that faith is a product of Jehovah’s holy spirit. (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Gal. 5:22, 23</a>) They prayed for help, and Jehovah kept strengthening their faith as a result. Let us do as they did, never forgetting that Jehovah gives his spirit generously to those who ask for it and who work in harmony with their prayers. (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Luke 11:13</a>) Is there more that we can do?</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>How can we gain the most benefit from our study of Bible accounts?</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In this book, we have discussed only a few examples of outstanding faith. There are many, many others! <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37"><strong><em>Hebrews 11:32</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>Each one<wbr />—in its own way—<wbr />offers a rich field for prayerful, heartfelt study. If we merely rush through Bible accounts about people of faith, we will not firmly establish our own faith. To benefit fully from our reading, we need to spend time digging into the context and the background of Bible accounts. If we always remember that those imperfect men and women had “feelings like ours,” their examples will become more real to us. (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Jas. 5:17</a>) With empathy, we can imagine how they might have felt as they faced challenges and problems similar to our own.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>7-9. </strong>(a) How might some of the men and women of faith in Bible times have felt about worshipping Jehovah in the way that we do today? (b) Why should we strengthen our faith by actions?</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>We also fortify our faith through our actions. After all, “faith without works is dead.” (<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Jas. 2:26</a>) Just imagine how the men and women we have discussed would rejoice if they were assigned to do the kind of work that Jehovah has asked us to do today!</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For example, what if Abraham had been told that he could worship Jehovah, not at crude altars of stone erected in the wilderness, but among organized groups of fellow worshippers in pleasant Kingdom Halls and at large conventions, where the promises that he saw only “afar off” are discussed and explained in glorious detail? <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"><strong><em>Hebrews 11:13</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>And what if Elijah had been told that his work involved, not executing wicked Baal prophets while he was trying to serve Jehovah under the rule of a wicked apostate king, but peacefully visiting people to deliver a message of comfort and hope? Really, would not the Bible’s men and women of faith have jumped at the chance to worship Jehovah as we do today?</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So let us keep strengthening our faith by actions. As we do so, we will be making practical application of the examples of men and women of faith found in God’s inspired Word. As mentioned in the Introduction, we will come to feel ever closer to them as friends. However, such friendships may soon become far more substantial.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>10. </strong>What joy will we have in Paradise?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong><em>Keep your hope clearly in mind. </em>Faithful men and women have always drawn strength from their God-given hope. Do you? For example, imagine the joy of meeting faithful servants of God as they return to life in the “resurrection of . . . the righteous.” <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"><strong><em>Acts 24:15</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>What are some questions that you would like to ask them?</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>11, 12. </strong>In the new world, what questions might you ask of (a) Abel? (b) Noah? (c) Abraham? (d) Ruth? (e) Abigail? (f) Esther?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When you meet Abel, will you be eager to ask him what his parents were like? Or you might ask: “Did you ever speak to those cherubs guarding the way to Eden? Did they answer?” What about Noah? You might ask him: “Were you ever frightened of the Nephilim? How did you care for all those animals during that year in the ark?” If you meet Abraham, you might ask: “Did you have any contact with Shem? Who taught you about Jehovah? Was it hard to leave Ur?”</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Likewise, consider some questions you might want to ask the faithful women who are resurrected. “Ruth, what moved you to become a worshipper of Jehovah?” “Abigail, were you afraid to tell Nabal about how you had helped David?” “Esther, what happened to you and Mordecai after the story in the Bible ended?”</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>13. </strong>(a) What kind of questions might resurrected ones have for you? (b) How do you feel about the prospect of meeting faithful men and women of ancient times?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Of course, those faithful men and women may be brimming with questions for you too. What a thrill to tell them about the climactic last days and how Jehovah blessed his people during hard times! No doubt they will be deeply moved to learn how Jehovah fulfilled all his promises. In those days to come, it will no longer be a challenge to make God’s loyal servants in the Bible record come to life in our minds. They will be there with us, in Paradise! So keep doing everything you can now to make those people real to you. Keep imitating their faith. May you enjoy serving Jehovah along with them as your dear friends forever!</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Heb. 6:12)</strong></a> so that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:17)</strong> For in it God’s righteousness is being revealed by faith and for faith, just as it is written: “But the righteous one will live by reason of faith.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 6:12)</strong> so that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:7)</strong> Therefore, subject yourselves to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Gal. 5:22, 23)</strong> On the other hand, the fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,* kindness, goodness, faith, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.</p><p></p><p>Or “long-suffering.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Luke 11:13)</strong> Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 11:32)</strong> And what more will I say? For time will fail me if I go on to relate about Gidʹe·on, Baʹrak, Samson, Jephʹthah, David, as well as Samuel and the other prophets.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 5:17)</strong> E·liʹjah was a man with feelings like ours, and yet when he prayed earnestly for it not to rain, it did not rain on the land for three years and six months.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 2:26)</strong> Indeed, just as the body without spirit* is dead, so also faith without works is dead.</p><p></p><p>Or “breath.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 11:13)</strong> In faith all of these died, although they did not receive the fulfillment of the promises; but they saw them from a distance and welcomed them and publicly declared that they were strangers and temporary residents in the land.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Acts 24:15)</strong> And I have hope toward God, which hope these men also look forward to, that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016325.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***sn song 119 Come! Be Refreshed***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 119</p>
<h1><strong>Come! Be Refreshed</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. We live in a world that is wayward and lost;</p>
<p class="p5">The way of our God is not known.</p>
<p class="p6">We need sure direction to safeguard our steps;</p>
<p class="p7">We cannot succeed on our own.</p>
<p class="p8">Our meetings refresh us and brighten our hope;</p>
<p class="p9">They help us build faith in our God.</p>
<p class="p10">They move us with words that incite to fine deeds,</p>
<p class="p11">They give us the strength to go on.</p>
<p class="p12">We’ll never forsake what Jehovah commands;</p>
<p class="p13">His will is what we want to do.</p>
<p class="p14">Our meetings instruct us in ways that are right;</p>
<p class="p15">Our love for the truth they renew.</p>
<p class="p16">2. Jehovah is keenly aware of our needs;</p>
<p class="p17">His counsel by us should be heard.</p>
<p class="p18">To buy out the time for occasions to meet</p>
<p class="p19">Shows wisdom and trust in his Word.</p>
<p class="p20">By wholesome instruction from God-fearing men,</p>
<p class="p21">We learn how our faith can be shown.</p>
<p class="p22">With loving support from our fam’ly of faith,</p>
<p class="p23">We know that we’re never alone.</p>
<p class="p24">So as we look forward to much better times,</p>
<p class="p25">We’ll meet with the ones whom we love.</p>
<p class="p26">And here at these meetings we’ll learn how to live</p>
<p class="p27">With wisdom that comes from above.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Ps. 37:18;</a><span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44"> 140:1;</a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> Prov. 18:1;</a><span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46"> Eph. 5:16;</a><span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47"> Jas. 3:17</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Ps. 37:18)</strong></a> Jehovah is aware of what the blameless go through,* And their inheritance will last forever.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the days of the blameless.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Ps. 140:1)</strong></a> Rescue me, O Jehovah, from evil men; Protect me from violent men,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Prov. 18:1)</strong></a> Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires; He rejects* all practical wisdom.</p><p></p><p>Or “shows contempt for.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Eph. 5:16)</strong></a> making the best use of your time,* because the days are wicked.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “buying out the appointed time.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Jas. 3:17)</strong></a> But the wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial, not hypocritical.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
