<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 Improving Our Skills in the Ministry—Encouraging Interested Ones to Attend Meetings</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016332.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***jl lesson 5 What Will You Experience at Our Christian Meetings?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl"><strong>LESSON 5</strong></p>
<h1><strong>What Will You Experience at Our Christian Meetings?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p3">Many people have stopped attending religious services because they find no spiritual guidance or comfort. Why, then, should you attend the Christian meetings organized by Jehovah’s Witnesses? What will you find there?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>The joy of being among loving and caring people. </strong>In the first century, Christians were organized into congregations, and they held meetings to worship God, to study the Scriptures, and to encourage one another. (<span id="citationsource5"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation5">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) Gathered in a loving atmosphere, they felt that they were among true friends<wbr />—their spiritual brothers. (<span id="citationsource6"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation6">2 Thessalonians 1:3;</a><span id="citationsource7"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation7"> 3 John 14</a>) We follow the same pattern and experience similar joy.</p>
<p class="p5"><strong>The benefit of learning how to apply Bible principles. </strong>As was true in Bible times, men, women, and children all meet together. Qualified teachers use the Bible to help us discern how to apply its principles in our daily life. (<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">Deuteronomy 31:12;</a><span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9"> Nehemiah 8:8</a>) All may participate in audience discussions and in singing, allowing us to express our Christian hope.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Hebrews 10:23</a>.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>The blessing of having your faith in God strengthened. </strong>The apostle Paul told one of the congregations in his day: “I am longing to see you, . . . that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.” (<span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Romans 1:11, 12</a>) At meetings, our regular contact with fellow believers strengthens our faith and determination to live a Christian life.</p>
<p class="p7">Why not accept this invitation to attend our congregation’s next meeting and experience these things for yourself? You will be warmly welcomed. All meetings are free<wbr />—no collections are ever taken.</p>
<ul><li><p class="p8">  On what pattern are our congregation meetings based?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p9">  How can we benefit ourselves by attending Christian meetings?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>FIND OUT MORE</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p12">If you would like to see inside the local Kingdom Hall before you attend one of our meetings, ask one of Jehovah’s Witnesses to take you there and show you around.</p>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation5"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource5">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation6"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource6">^ <strong>(2 Thess. 1:3)</strong></a> We are obligated always to give thanks to God for you, brothers. This is fitting, because your faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and every one of you is increasing toward one another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation7"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource7">^ <strong>(3 John 14)</strong></a> However, I am hoping to see you soon, and we will speak face-to-face. May you have peace. The friends send you their greetings. Give my greetings to the friends by name.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Deut. 31:12)</strong></a> Gather the people together, the men, the women, the children,* and your foreign resident who is within your cities,* in order that they may listen and learn about and fear Jehovah your God and take care to carry out all the words of this Law.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “little ones.”</p><p>Lit., “gates.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Neh. 8:8)</strong></a> And they continued reading aloud from the book, from the Law of the true God, clearly explaining it and putting meaning into it; so they helped the people to understand what was being read.*</p><p></p><p>Or “they gave understanding in the reading.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:23)</strong></a> Let us hold firmly the public declaration of our hope without wavering, for the one who promised is faithful.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Rom. 1:11, 12)</strong></a> For I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016332.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***jl lesson 7 What Are Our Meetings Like?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl"><strong>LESSON 7</strong></p>
<h1><strong>What Are Our Meetings Like?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p3">Early Christian meetings consisted mainly of songs, prayers, and the reading and discussing of the Scriptures<wbr />—all free of any ritual. (<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">1 Corinthians 14:26</a>) You can expect something very similar at our meetings.</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>The instruction is Bible-based and practical. </strong>On the weekend, each congregation meets to hear a 30-minute <strong><em>Bible discourse </em></strong>on how the Scriptures relate to our lives and to the times we live in. All of us are encouraged to follow along in our own Bible. After the discourse, there is a one-hour <strong><em>“Watchtower” Study, </em></strong>in which members of the congregation are welcome to participate in a discussion of an article from the study edition of <em>The Watchtower.</em> This discussion helps us to apply the Bible’s guidance in our lives. The same material is studied in every one of our more than 110,000 congregations earth wide.</p>
<p class="p5"><strong>We are helped to improve our teaching skills. </strong>We also meet together on a midweek evening for a three-part program entitled <strong><em>Our Christian Life and Ministry, </em></strong>based on material provided in a monthly <em>Life and Ministry Meeting Workbook. </em>The first part of this meeting, Treasures From God’s Word, helps us to become familiar with a portion of the Bible that the congregation has read in advance. Next, Apply Yourself to the Field Ministry includes demonstrations of how to discuss the Bible with others. A counselor makes observations that help us improve our reading and speaking skills. (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">1 Timothy 4:13</a>) The last part, Living as Christians, considers the practical application of Bible principles in day-to-day life. This includes a question-and-answer discussion that deepens our understanding of the Bible.</p>
<p class="p6">When you attend our meetings, you will no doubt be impressed by the quality of Bible education that you are receiving.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Isaiah 54:13</a>.</p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  What can you expect to hear at the meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  Which of our weekly meetings would you like to attend next?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>FIND OUT MORE</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p11">Examine some of the material that will be discussed at the next few meetings. Note what you will be able to learn from the Bible that can be useful in your everyday life.</p>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 14:26)</strong></a> What is to be done, then, brothers? When you come together, one has a psalm, another has a teaching, another has a revelation, another has a tongue, and another has an interpretation. Let all things take place for building up.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 4:13)</strong></a> Until I come, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation,* to teaching.</p><p></p><p>Or “encouragement.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Isa. 54:13)</strong></a> And all your sons* will be taught by Jehovah, And the peace of your sons* will be abundant.</p><p></p><p>Or “children.”</p><p>Or “children.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
