<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 “Walk in the Law of Jehovah”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016323.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:1-176)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Happy are those who are blameless* in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Happy are those who observe his reminders, Who search for him with all their heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They practice no unrighteousness; They walk in his ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If only I could remain steadfast* So as to observe your regulations!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then I would not be put to shame When I consider all your commandments.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>With my whole heart I seek you. Do not let me stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>In my heart I treasure up your saying So that I may not sin against you. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>May you be praised, O Jehovah; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>With my lips I declare All the judgments that you have spoken. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your reminders More than over all other valuable things. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will ponder over* your orders And keep my eyes on your paths. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I am fond of your statutes. I will not forget your word. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Deal kindly with your servant, So that I may live and observe your word. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Open my eyes so that I may see clearly The wonderful things from your law. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>I am but a foreigner in the land. Do not hide your commandments from me. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I am* consumed with longing For your judgments at all times. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>You rebuke the presumptuous, The cursed ones who stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Remove from me* scorn and contempt, For I have observed your reminders. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Even when princes sit together and speak against me, Your servant ponders over* your regulations. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I am fond of your reminders; They are my advisers. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I lie* prostrate in the dust. Preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I told you of my ways, and you answered me; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Make me understand the meaning* of your orders, So that I may ponder over* your wonderful works. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>I have* been sleepless from grief. Strengthen me according to your word. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Remove from me the way of deception, And favor me with your law. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The way of faithfulness I have chosen. I recognize that your judgments are right. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I cling to your reminders. O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>I will eagerly pursue* the way of your commandments Because you make room for it in my heart.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.* <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Fulfill your promise* to your servant, So that you may be feared.* <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>Remove the disgrace that I dread, For your judgments are good. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah, Your salvation in harmony with your promise;* <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in* your judgment. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>And I will walk about in a place of safety,* For I search for your orders. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>I am fond of your commandments, Yes, I love them. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love, And I will ponder over* your regulations. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Remember your word* to your servant, Through which you give me hope.* <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>This is my comfort in my affliction, For your saying has preserved me alive. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>The presumptuous utterly scorn me, But I do not deviate from your law. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah, And I find comfort in them. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked, Who forsake your law. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>Your regulations are songs to me Wherever I dwell.* <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah, So that I may keep your law. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>This has been my practice Because I have observed your orders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>Jehovah is my portion; I have promised to keep your words. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>I appeal to you* with all my heart; Show me favor according to your promise.* <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>I have examined my ways, In order to turn my feet back to your reminders. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>I hurry and do not delay To keep your commandments. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>The ropes of the wicked surround me, But your law I do not forget. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>At midnight I get up to give you thanks For your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>I am a friend of all who fear you And of those who keep your orders. <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>You have dealt well with your servant, O Jehovah, according to your word. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>Teach me good sense and knowledge, For I have put my trust in your commandments. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray,* But now I keep your saying. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>You are good and your works are good. Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>The presumptuous smear me with lies, But I observe your orders with all my heart. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>Their heart is insensitive,* But I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>It is good that I have been afflicted, So that I may learn your regulations. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>The law that you have proclaimed is good for me, More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver. <strong><sup>73 </sup></strong>Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments. <strong><sup>74 </sup></strong>Those who fear you see me and rejoice, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>75 </sup></strong>I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteous And that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness. <strong><sup>76 </sup></strong>May your loyal love please comfort me, According to the promise* you made to your servant. <strong><sup>77 </sup></strong>Show me mercy, so that I may keep living, For I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>78 </sup></strong>May the presumptuous be put to shame, For they wrong me without cause.* But I will ponder over* your orders. <strong><sup>79 </sup></strong>Let those who fear you return to me, Those who know your reminders. <strong><sup>80 </sup></strong>May my heart be blameless in following your regulations, So that I may not be put to shame. <strong><sup>81 </sup></strong>I long for* your salvation, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>82 </sup></strong>My eyes long for your saying While I say: “When will you comfort me?” <strong><sup>83 </sup></strong>For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke, But your regulations I do not forget. <strong><sup>84 </sup></strong>How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me? <strong><sup>85 </sup></strong>The presumptuous dig pits for me, Those who defy your law. <strong><sup>86 </sup></strong>All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me! <strong><sup>87 </sup></strong>They almost exterminated me from the earth, But I did not abandon your orders. <strong><sup>88 </sup></strong>Preserve me alive because of your loyal love, So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken. <strong><sup>89 </sup></strong>Forever, O Jehovah, Your word will remain in the heavens. <strong><sup>90 </sup></strong>Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand. <strong><sup>91 </sup></strong>By your judgments they* remain until today, For they are all your servants. <strong><sup>92 </sup></strong>If I had not been fond of your law, I would have perished in my affliction. <strong><sup>93 </sup></strong>I will never forget your orders, Because by them you have preserved me alive. <strong><sup>94 </sup></strong>I belong to you; save me, Because I have searched for your orders. <strong><sup>95 </sup></strong>The wicked wait to destroy me, But I give close attention to your reminders. <strong><sup>96 </sup></strong>I have seen a limit to all perfection, But your commandment has no limit.* <strong><sup>97 </sup></strong>How I do love your law! I ponder over* it all day long. <strong><sup>98 </sup></strong>Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies, Because it is with me forever. <strong><sup>99 </sup></strong>I have more insight than all my teachers, Because I ponder over* your reminders. <strong><sup>100 </sup></strong>I act with more understanding than older men, Because I observe your orders. <strong><sup>101 </sup></strong>I refuse to walk on any evil path, So that I may keep your word. <strong><sup>102 </sup></strong>I do not turn aside from your judgments, For you have instructed me. <strong><sup>103 </sup></strong>How sweet your sayings are to my palate, More so than honey to my mouth! <strong><sup>104 </sup></strong>By your orders I act with understanding. That is why I hate every false path. <strong><sup>105 </sup></strong>Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path. <strong><sup>106 </sup></strong>I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out, To observe your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>107 </sup></strong>I have been greatly afflicted. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>108 </sup></strong>Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise,* O Jehovah, And teach me your judgments. <strong><sup>109 </sup></strong>My life is in constant danger,* But I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>110 </sup></strong>The wicked have set a trap for me, But I have not strayed from your orders. <strong><sup>111 </sup></strong>I take your reminders as my permanent possession,* For they are the joy of my heart. <strong><sup>112 </sup></strong>I have resolved* to obey your regulations At all times, down to the last. <strong><sup>113 </sup></strong>I hate the halfhearted ones,* But I love your law. <strong><sup>114 </sup></strong>You are my shelter and my shield, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>115 </sup></strong>Stay away from me, you evil men, So that I may observe the commandments of my God. <strong><sup>116 </sup></strong>Support me as you promised,* So that I may keep living; Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.* <strong><sup>117 </sup></strong>Support me that I may be saved; Then I will always concentrate on your regulations. <strong><sup>118 </sup></strong>You reject all those who stray from your regulations, For they are false and deceitful. <strong><sup>119 </sup></strong>You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross. That is why I love your reminders. <strong><sup>120 </sup></strong>The dread of you makes my body* tremble; I am in fear of your judgments. <strong><sup>121 </sup></strong>I have done what is just and righteous. Do not abandon me to my oppressors! <strong><sup>122 </sup></strong>Guarantee the welfare of your servant; May the presumptuous not oppress me. <strong><sup>123 </sup></strong>My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvation And for your righteous promise.* <strong><sup>124 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>125 </sup></strong>I am your servant; give me understanding, So that I may know your reminders. <strong><sup>126 </sup></strong>The time has come for Jehovah to act, For they have broken your law. <strong><sup>127 </sup></strong>That is why I love your commandments More than gold, even fine* gold. <strong><sup>128 </sup></strong>Therefore, I consider every instruction* from you to be right; I hate every false path. <strong><sup>129 </sup></strong>Your reminders are wonderful. That is why I observe* them. <strong><sup>130 </sup></strong>The disclosure of your words brings light, Giving understanding to the inexperienced. <strong><sup>131 </sup></strong>I open my mouth wide and sigh,* Because I long for your commandments. <strong><sup>132 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor, In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name. <strong><sup>133 </sup></strong>Guide my steps safely* by your saying; May nothing wicked dominate me. <strong><sup>134 </sup></strong>Rescue* me from oppressive men, And I will keep your orders. <strong><sup>135 </sup></strong>Make your face shine* upon your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>136 </sup></strong>Tears stream down from my eyes Because people do not keep your law. <strong><sup>137 </sup></strong>You are righteous, O Jehovah, And your judgments are fair. <strong><sup>138 </sup></strong>The reminders you give are righteous And completely reliable. <strong><sup>139 </sup></strong>My zeal consumes me, Because my adversaries have forgotten your words. <strong><sup>140 </sup></strong>Your saying is thoroughly refined, And your servant loves it. <strong><sup>141 </sup></strong>I am insignificant and despised; Yet, I have not forgotten your orders. <strong><sup>142 </sup></strong>Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness, And your law is truth. <strong><sup>143 </sup></strong>Though distress and difficulty come upon me, I remain fond of your commandments. <strong><sup>144 </sup></strong>The righteousness of your reminders is eternal. Give me understanding, so that I may keep living. <strong><sup>145 </sup></strong>I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe. <strong><sup>146 </sup></strong>I call on you; save me! I will keep your reminders. <strong><sup>147 </sup></strong>I have been awake before dawn* to cry for help, For your words are my hope.* <strong><sup>148 </sup></strong>My eyes open before the night watches, So that I can ponder over* your saying. <strong><sup>149 </sup></strong>Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice. <strong><sup>150 </sup></strong>Those who engage in shameful conduct* come near; They are far away from your law. <strong><sup>151 </sup></strong>You are near, O Jehovah, And all your commandments are truth. <strong><sup>152 </sup></strong>Long ago I learned about your reminders, That you have established them to last forever. <strong><sup>153 </sup></strong>Look on my affliction and rescue me, For I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>154 </sup></strong>Defend me* and rescue me; Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.* <strong><sup>155 </sup></strong>Salvation is far away from the wicked, For they have not searched for your regulations. <strong><sup>156 </sup></strong>Your mercy is great, O Jehovah. Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice. <strong><sup>157 </sup></strong>My persecutors and my adversaries are many; But I have not deviated from your reminders. <strong><sup>158 </sup></strong>I look on the treacherous with loathing, Because they do not keep your saying. <strong><sup>159 </sup></strong>See how I love your orders! O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love. <strong><sup>160 </sup></strong>The very essence of your word is truth, And all your righteous judgments endure forever. <strong><sup>161 </sup></strong>Princes persecute me for no cause, But my heart stands in awe of your words. <strong><sup>162 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your saying Like someone who finds great spoil. <strong><sup>163 </sup></strong>I hate falsehood—I detest it— I love your law. <strong><sup>164 </sup></strong>Seven times a day I praise you Because of your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>165 </sup></strong>Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; Nothing can make them stumble.* <strong><sup>166 </sup></strong>I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah, And I observe your commandments. <strong><sup>167 </sup></strong>I keep* your reminders, And I love them dearly. <strong><sup>168 </sup></strong>I observe your orders and your reminders, For you are aware of all that I do. <strong><sup>169 </sup></strong>May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah. According to your word, make me understand. <strong><sup>170 </sup></strong>May my request for favor come before you. Save me, as you have promised.* <strong><sup>171 </sup></strong>May my lips overflow with praise, For you teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>172 </sup></strong>May my tongue sing about your saying, For all your commandments are righteous. <strong><sup>173 </sup></strong>May your hand be ready to help me, Because I choose to obey your orders. <strong><sup>174 </sup></strong>I long for your salvation, O Jehovah, And I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>175 </sup></strong>Let me* live so that I may praise you; May your judgments be my help. <strong><sup>176 </sup></strong>I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant, For I have not forgotten your commandments.</p><p></p><p>Or “who keep integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “O that my ways were firmly established.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll away from upon me.”</p><p>Or “studies.”</p><p>Or “My soul lies.”</p><p>Lit., “way.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “will run.”</p><p>Or possibly, “you make my heart have the confidence.”</p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p><p>Or “to profits.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Which is made to those who fear you.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I wait for.”</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “promise.”</p><p>Or “For which you made me wait.”</p><p>Or “In the house where I dwell as a foreigner.”</p><p>Or “I soften (seek the smile of) your face.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I was sinning by mistake.”</p><p>Lit., “unfeeling, like fat.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “with lies.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul pines for.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>That is, all his creative works.</p><p>Lit., “is very broad.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Lit., “the voluntary offerings of my mouth.”</p><p>Or “My soul is in my hand constantly.”</p><p>Or “my eternal heritage.”</p><p>Lit., “have inclined my heart.”</p><p>Or “men of divided heart.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “flesh.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “refined.”</p><p>Or “order.”</p><p>Or “my soul observes.”</p><p>Lit., “pant.”</p><p>Or “Make my steps steady.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeem.”</p><p>Or “smile.”</p><p>Or “in the morning twilight.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your words.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “in obscene conduct.”</p><p>Or “Conduct my legal case.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “For them there is no stumbling block.”</p><p>Or “My soul keeps.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016323.xhtml#citationsource5">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:1-176)</strong></a> <span id="citation5"></span>Happy are those who are blameless* in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Happy are those who observe his reminders, Who search for him with all their heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They practice no unrighteousness; They walk in his ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If only I could remain steadfast* So as to observe your regulations!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then I would not be put to shame When I consider all your commandments.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>With my whole heart I seek you. Do not let me stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>In my heart I treasure up your saying So that I may not sin against you. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>May you be praised, O Jehovah; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>With my lips I declare All the judgments that you have spoken. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your reminders More than over all other valuable things. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will ponder over* your orders And keep my eyes on your paths. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I am fond of your statutes. I will not forget your word. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Deal kindly with your servant, So that I may live and observe your word. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Open my eyes so that I may see clearly The wonderful things from your law. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>I am but a foreigner in the land. Do not hide your commandments from me. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I am* consumed with longing For your judgments at all times. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>You rebuke the presumptuous, The cursed ones who stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Remove from me* scorn and contempt, For I have observed your reminders. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Even when princes sit together and speak against me, Your servant ponders over* your regulations. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I am fond of your reminders; They are my advisers. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I lie* prostrate in the dust. Preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I told you of my ways, and you answered me; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Make me understand the meaning* of your orders, So that I may ponder over* your wonderful works. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>I have* been sleepless from grief. Strengthen me according to your word. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Remove from me the way of deception, And favor me with your law. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The way of faithfulness I have chosen. I recognize that your judgments are right. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I cling to your reminders. O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>I will eagerly pursue* the way of your commandments Because you make room for it in my heart.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.* <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Fulfill your promise* to your servant, So that you may be feared.* <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>Remove the disgrace that I dread, For your judgments are good. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah, Your salvation in harmony with your promise;* <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in* your judgment. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>And I will walk about in a place of safety,* For I search for your orders. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>I am fond of your commandments, Yes, I love them. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love, And I will ponder over* your regulations. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Remember your word* to your servant, Through which you give me hope.* <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>This is my comfort in my affliction, For your saying has preserved me alive. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>The presumptuous utterly scorn me, But I do not deviate from your law. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah, And I find comfort in them. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked, Who forsake your law. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>Your regulations are songs to me Wherever I dwell.* <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah, So that I may keep your law. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>This has been my practice Because I have observed your orders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>Jehovah is my portion; I have promised to keep your words. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>I appeal to you* with all my heart; Show me favor according to your promise.* <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>I have examined my ways, In order to turn my feet back to your reminders. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>I hurry and do not delay To keep your commandments. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>The ropes of the wicked surround me, But your law I do not forget. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>At midnight I get up to give you thanks For your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>I am a friend of all who fear you And of those who keep your orders. <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>You have dealt well with your servant, O Jehovah, according to your word. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>Teach me good sense and knowledge, For I have put my trust in your commandments. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray,* But now I keep your saying. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>You are good and your works are good. Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>The presumptuous smear me with lies, But I observe your orders with all my heart. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>Their heart is insensitive,* But I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>It is good that I have been afflicted, So that I may learn your regulations. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>The law that you have proclaimed is good for me, More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver. <strong><sup>73 </sup></strong>Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments. <strong><sup>74 </sup></strong>Those who fear you see me and rejoice, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>75 </sup></strong>I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteous And that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness. <strong><sup>76 </sup></strong>May your loyal love please comfort me, According to the promise* you made to your servant. <strong><sup>77 </sup></strong>Show me mercy, so that I may keep living, For I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>78 </sup></strong>May the presumptuous be put to shame, For they wrong me without cause.* But I will ponder over* your orders. <strong><sup>79 </sup></strong>Let those who fear you return to me, Those who know your reminders. <strong><sup>80 </sup></strong>May my heart be blameless in following your regulations, So that I may not be put to shame. <strong><sup>81 </sup></strong>I long for* your salvation, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>82 </sup></strong>My eyes long for your saying While I say: “When will you comfort me?” <strong><sup>83 </sup></strong>For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke, But your regulations I do not forget. <strong><sup>84 </sup></strong>How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me? <strong><sup>85 </sup></strong>The presumptuous dig pits for me, Those who defy your law. <strong><sup>86 </sup></strong>All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me! <strong><sup>87 </sup></strong>They almost exterminated me from the earth, But I did not abandon your orders. <strong><sup>88 </sup></strong>Preserve me alive because of your loyal love, So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken. <strong><sup>89 </sup></strong>Forever, O Jehovah, Your word will remain in the heavens. <strong><sup>90 </sup></strong>Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand. <strong><sup>91 </sup></strong>By your judgments they* remain until today, For they are all your servants. <strong><sup>92 </sup></strong>If I had not been fond of your law, I would have perished in my affliction. <strong><sup>93 </sup></strong>I will never forget your orders, Because by them you have preserved me alive. <strong><sup>94 </sup></strong>I belong to you; save me, Because I have searched for your orders. <strong><sup>95 </sup></strong>The wicked wait to destroy me, But I give close attention to your reminders. <strong><sup>96 </sup></strong>I have seen a limit to all perfection, But your commandment has no limit.* <strong><sup>97 </sup></strong>How I do love your law! I ponder over* it all day long. <strong><sup>98 </sup></strong>Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies, Because it is with me forever. <strong><sup>99 </sup></strong>I have more insight than all my teachers, Because I ponder over* your reminders. <strong><sup>100 </sup></strong>I act with more understanding than older men, Because I observe your orders. <strong><sup>101 </sup></strong>I refuse to walk on any evil path, So that I may keep your word. <strong><sup>102 </sup></strong>I do not turn aside from your judgments, For you have instructed me. <strong><sup>103 </sup></strong>How sweet your sayings are to my palate, More so than honey to my mouth! <strong><sup>104 </sup></strong>By your orders I act with understanding. That is why I hate every false path. <strong><sup>105 </sup></strong>Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path. <strong><sup>106 </sup></strong>I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out, To observe your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>107 </sup></strong>I have been greatly afflicted. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>108 </sup></strong>Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise,* O Jehovah, And teach me your judgments. <strong><sup>109 </sup></strong>My life is in constant danger,* But I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>110 </sup></strong>The wicked have set a trap for me, But I have not strayed from your orders. <strong><sup>111 </sup></strong>I take your reminders as my permanent possession,* For they are the joy of my heart. <strong><sup>112 </sup></strong>I have resolved* to obey your regulations At all times, down to the last. <strong><sup>113 </sup></strong>I hate the halfhearted ones,* But I love your law. <strong><sup>114 </sup></strong>You are my shelter and my shield, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>115 </sup></strong>Stay away from me, you evil men, So that I may observe the commandments of my God. <strong><sup>116 </sup></strong>Support me as you promised,* So that I may keep living; Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.* <strong><sup>117 </sup></strong>Support me that I may be saved; Then I will always concentrate on your regulations. <strong><sup>118 </sup></strong>You reject all those who stray from your regulations, For they are false and deceitful. <strong><sup>119 </sup></strong>You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross. That is why I love your reminders. <strong><sup>120 </sup></strong>The dread of you makes my body* tremble; I am in fear of your judgments. <strong><sup>121 </sup></strong>I have done what is just and righteous. Do not abandon me to my oppressors! <strong><sup>122 </sup></strong>Guarantee the welfare of your servant; May the presumptuous not oppress me. <strong><sup>123 </sup></strong>My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvation And for your righteous promise.* <strong><sup>124 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>125 </sup></strong>I am your servant; give me understanding, So that I may know your reminders. <strong><sup>126 </sup></strong>The time has come for Jehovah to act, For they have broken your law. <strong><sup>127 </sup></strong>That is why I love your commandments More than gold, even fine* gold. <strong><sup>128 </sup></strong>Therefore, I consider every instruction* from you to be right; I hate every false path. <strong><sup>129 </sup></strong>Your reminders are wonderful. That is why I observe* them. <strong><sup>130 </sup></strong>The disclosure of your words brings light, Giving understanding to the inexperienced. <strong><sup>131 </sup></strong>I open my mouth wide and sigh,* Because I long for your commandments. <strong><sup>132 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor, In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name. <strong><sup>133 </sup></strong>Guide my steps safely* by your saying; May nothing wicked dominate me. <strong><sup>134 </sup></strong>Rescue* me from oppressive men, And I will keep your orders. <strong><sup>135 </sup></strong>Make your face shine* upon your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>136 </sup></strong>Tears stream down from my eyes Because people do not keep your law. <strong><sup>137 </sup></strong>You are righteous, O Jehovah, And your judgments are fair. <strong><sup>138 </sup></strong>The reminders you give are righteous And completely reliable. <strong><sup>139 </sup></strong>My zeal consumes me, Because my adversaries have forgotten your words. <strong><sup>140 </sup></strong>Your saying is thoroughly refined, And your servant loves it. <strong><sup>141 </sup></strong>I am insignificant and despised; Yet, I have not forgotten your orders. <strong><sup>142 </sup></strong>Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness, And your law is truth. <strong><sup>143 </sup></strong>Though distress and difficulty come upon me, I remain fond of your commandments. <strong><sup>144 </sup></strong>The righteousness of your reminders is eternal. Give me understanding, so that I may keep living. <strong><sup>145 </sup></strong>I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe. <strong><sup>146 </sup></strong>I call on you; save me! I will keep your reminders. <strong><sup>147 </sup></strong>I have been awake before dawn* to cry for help, For your words are my hope.* <strong><sup>148 </sup></strong>My eyes open before the night watches, So that I can ponder over* your saying. <strong><sup>149 </sup></strong>Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice. <strong><sup>150 </sup></strong>Those who engage in shameful conduct* come near; They are far away from your law. <strong><sup>151 </sup></strong>You are near, O Jehovah, And all your commandments are truth. <strong><sup>152 </sup></strong>Long ago I learned about your reminders, That you have established them to last forever. <strong><sup>153 </sup></strong>Look on my affliction and rescue me, For I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>154 </sup></strong>Defend me* and rescue me; Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.* <strong><sup>155 </sup></strong>Salvation is far away from the wicked, For they have not searched for your regulations. <strong><sup>156 </sup></strong>Your mercy is great, O Jehovah. Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice. <strong><sup>157 </sup></strong>My persecutors and my adversaries are many; But I have not deviated from your reminders. <strong><sup>158 </sup></strong>I look on the treacherous with loathing, Because they do not keep your saying. <strong><sup>159 </sup></strong>See how I love your orders! O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love. <strong><sup>160 </sup></strong>The very essence of your word is truth, And all your righteous judgments endure forever. <strong><sup>161 </sup></strong>Princes persecute me for no cause, But my heart stands in awe of your words. <strong><sup>162 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your saying Like someone who finds great spoil. <strong><sup>163 </sup></strong>I hate falsehood—I detest it— I love your law. <strong><sup>164 </sup></strong>Seven times a day I praise you Because of your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>165 </sup></strong>Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; Nothing can make them stumble.* <strong><sup>166 </sup></strong>I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah, And I observe your commandments. <strong><sup>167 </sup></strong>I keep* your reminders, And I love them dearly. <strong><sup>168 </sup></strong>I observe your orders and your reminders, For you are aware of all that I do. <strong><sup>169 </sup></strong>May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah. According to your word, make me understand. <strong><sup>170 </sup></strong>May my request for favor come before you. Save me, as you have promised.* <strong><sup>171 </sup></strong>May my lips overflow with praise, For you teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>172 </sup></strong>May my tongue sing about your saying, For all your commandments are righteous. <strong><sup>173 </sup></strong>May your hand be ready to help me, Because I choose to obey your orders. <strong><sup>174 </sup></strong>I long for your salvation, O Jehovah, And I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>175 </sup></strong>Let me* live so that I may praise you; May your judgments be my help. <strong><sup>176 </sup></strong>I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant, For I have not forgotten your commandments.</p><p></p><p>Or “who keep integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “O that my ways were firmly established.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll away from upon me.”</p><p>Or “studies.”</p><p>Or “My soul lies.”</p><p>Lit., “way.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “will run.”</p><p>Or possibly, “you make my heart have the confidence.”</p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p><p>Or “to profits.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Which is made to those who fear you.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I wait for.”</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “promise.”</p><p>Or “For which you made me wait.”</p><p>Or “In the house where I dwell as a foreigner.”</p><p>Or “I soften (seek the smile of) your face.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I was sinning by mistake.”</p><p>Lit., “unfeeling, like fat.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “with lies.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul pines for.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>That is, all his creative works.</p><p>Lit., “is very broad.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Lit., “the voluntary offerings of my mouth.”</p><p>Or “My soul is in my hand constantly.”</p><p>Or “my eternal heritage.”</p><p>Lit., “have inclined my heart.”</p><p>Or “men of divided heart.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “flesh.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “refined.”</p><p>Or “order.”</p><p>Or “my soul observes.”</p><p>Lit., “pant.”</p><p>Or “Make my steps steady.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeem.”</p><p>Or “smile.”</p><p>Or “in the morning twilight.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your words.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “in obscene conduct.”</p><p>Or “Conduct my legal case.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “For them there is no stumbling block.”</p><p>Or “My soul keeps.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
