<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 5/16 Is the Bible Still Changing Your Life?</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016367.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 61 What Sort of Person I Should Be***</strong></a><br />Song 61</p><p><strong>What Sort of Person I Should Be</strong></p><p>(2 Peter 3:11)</p><p>1. How can I repay you, what gift can I give</p><p>To thank you, Jehovah, for the life that I live?</p><p>I look in my heart with your Word as my mirror;</p><p>The person I see, may you help me see clearer.</p><p>My life I have promised in service to you,</p><p>But not from mere duty will I do what I do.</p><p>Whole-souled and wholehearted I serve you by choice;</p><p>May I be one more who makes you rejoice.</p><p>2. Help me to examine, and help me to see</p><p>Just what sort of person you desire me to be.</p><p>Those loyal to you, you will loyally treasure;</p><p>May I be among those who bring your heart pleasure.</p><p>(See also Ps. 18:25; 116:12; 119:37; Prov. 11:20.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016367.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 52 Guard Your Heart***</strong></a><br />Song 52</p><p><strong>Guard Your Heart</strong></p><p>(Proverbs 4:23)</p><p>1. Oh, guard your heart, it means your life;</p><p>Avoid the path of sin.</p><p>God reads the heart, and there he finds</p><p>The person deep within.</p><p>Sometimes the heart is desperate</p><p>And could begin to stray.</p><p>So use your mind to guide your heart,</p><p>And keep Jehovah’s way.</p><p>2. Prepare your heart to search for God</p><p>By means of earnest prayer.</p><p>With constancy, give praise and thanks;</p><p>Confide each need and care.</p><p>The things Jehovah teaches us</p><p>Are things we should obey.</p><p>So cultivate a loyal heart,</p><p>And please him ev’ry day.</p><p>3. Protect your heart from harmful thoughts;</p><p>Consider what is true.</p><p>Allow God’s Word to reach your heart,</p><p>To strengthen and renew.</p><p>Jehovah loves his loyal ones;</p><p>On this we can depend.</p><p>So worship him wholeheartedly</p><p>Forever as his friend.</p><p>(See also Ps. 34:1; Phil. 4:8; 1 Pet. 3:4.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
