<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 5/16 Benefit Fully From Jehovah’s Provisions</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016364.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 117 We Must Be Taught***</strong></a><br />Song 117</p><p><strong>We Must Be Taught</strong></p><p>(Isaiah 50:4; 54:13)</p><p>1. Come with rejoicing, and learn about Jehovah.</p><p>“Come drink life’s water,” the spirit has said.</p><p>Healthful instruction, God has provided.</p><p>All those who hunger for truth will be fed.</p><p>2. Never forsaking our gathering together,</p><p>We must be taught; we must learn what is right.</p><p>Here with God’s spirit, here with our brothers,</p><p>Here we are strengthened to walk in the light.</p><p>3. Lips that sing praise, how encouraging to hear them!</p><p>Tongues of the taught ones, how sweet is their sound!</p><p>Oh, may we always meet with God’s people!</p><p>Oh, may we always among them be found!</p><p>(See also Heb. 10:24, 25; Rev. 22:17.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016364.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 114 God’s Own Book—A Treasure***</strong></a><br />Song 114</p><p><strong>God’s Own Book<wbr />—A Treasure</strong></p><p>(Proverbs 2:1)</p><p>1. There is a book that by its many pages,</p><p>Brings peace and joy and hope to humankind.</p><p>Its wondrous thoughts are charged with such great power;</p><p>It brings life to the “dead,” sight to the “blind.”</p><p>That precious book is God’s own Holy Bible.</p><p>Its words were penned by men whom God inspired,</p><p>By men who truly loved their God Jehovah,</p><p>And by his holy spirit they were fired.</p><p>2. They wrote a record true of God’s creations,</p><p>How by his might this universe appeared.</p><p>They also told how man at first was sinless</p><p>But how his Paradise then disappeared.</p><p>They further told about a certain angel</p><p>Who challenged God and spurned his sov’reignty.</p><p>That challenge led to sin and man’s great sorrow,</p><p>But soon will come Jehovah’s victory.</p><p>3. Today we live in times of joy unbounded.</p><p>God’s Kingdom now is here with Christ as Lord.</p><p>This is the day Jehovah grants salvation</p><p>To all who come to him in full accord.</p><p>Within his book are found these cheerful tidings;</p><p>A sacred banquet feast on which to feed.</p><p>It offers peace beyond all human thinking;</p><p>This Living Treasure beckons all to read.</p><p>(See also 2 Tim. 3:16; 2 Pet. 1:21.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016364.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***g 4/09 pp. 23-26 How Can I Make Bible Reading Enjoyable?***</strong></a><br /><strong>Young People Ask</strong></p><p><strong>How Can I Make Bible Reading Enjoyable?</strong></p><p><strong>How often do you read the Bible? </strong>(Check one)</p><p>□ Daily</p><p>□ Weekly</p><p>□ Other ․․․․․</p><p>Complete the following sentence.</p><p><strong>When I don’t enjoy Bible reading, it’s usually because I am . . . </strong>(Check all that apply)</p><p>□ Bored</p><p>□ Confused</p><p>□ Distracted</p><p>□ Other ․․․․․</p><p>ARE you less than thrilled about reading the Bible? If so, you might agree with 18-year-old Will, who says, “The Bible <em>can </em>seem boring.” However, he adds, <em>“That’s only if you don’t know how to read it.”</em></p><p>Why learn <em>how </em>to read the Bible? Well, would you like to know more about how to</p><p>▪ <strong>make good decisions?</strong></p><p>▪ <strong>have real friends?</strong></p><p>▪ <strong>cope with stress?</strong></p><p>The Bible contains gems of wisdom on those subjects and more. Granted, finding these gems may take effort. But expending that effort is a lot like going on a treasure hunt: The more challenging the search, the more exciting the discovery!<wbr />—Proverbs 2:1-6.</p><p>How can you discover treasures in the Bible? The cutout to the right will give you an idea of how to read the Bible and<wbr />—on the reverse side—<wbr />in what order to read it. Also, try the suggestions on the following pages that appeal to <em>you.</em></p><p>More articles from the “Young People Ask” series can be found at the Web site www.watchtower.org/<wbr />ype</p><p>If you have access to the Internet, you can read the Bible online at www.watchtower.org/<wbr />e/<wbr />bible</p><p><strong>TO THINK ABOUT</strong></p><p>It’s been said that what you get out of an endeavor depends largely upon what you put into it.</p><p>▪ How is that true when it comes to reading the Bible?</p><p>▪ When can you make time for personal Bible reading?</p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Picture on page 23]</strong></p><p><strong>HOW TO READ THE BIBLE</strong></p><p><strong>Before you read . . .</strong></p><p>▪ Make sure your surroundings are quiet so that you can concentrate.</p><p>▪ Pray for understanding.</p><p><strong>While you read . . .</strong></p><p>▪ Use maps and depictions of Bible accounts to help you visualize Bible scenes.</p><p>▪ Consider the setting, and analyze details.</p><p>▪ Consult footnotes and cross-references.</p><p>▪ Ask yourself such questions as:</p><p><strong>FACTS: </strong>When did this occur? Who spoke these words? To whom were the words addressed?</p><p><strong>MEANING: </strong>How would I explain this to someone else?</p><p><strong>VALUE: </strong>Why did Jehovah God include this account in his Word? What does it reveal about his personality or way of doing things? What lessons can I apply to my life?</p><p><strong>After you read . . .</strong></p><p>▪ Do further research. Use tools produced by Jehovah’s Witnesses, such as <em>Insight on the Scriptures </em>and <em>“All Scripture Is Inspired of God and Beneficial,” </em>if available in your language.</p><p>▪ Pray again. Tell Jehovah what you learned and how you plan to use it. Thank him for his Word, the Bible.</p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Picture on page 24]</strong></p><p><strong>IN WHAT ORDER WILL YOU READ THE BIBLE?</strong></p><p><strong>Options . . .</strong></p><p>□ Read from cover to cover.</p><p>□ Read chronologically, either in the order in which the books were written or the order in which events occurred.</p><p>□ Each day, read from a different section of the Scriptures.</p><p><strong>Monday: </strong>Action-packed history (<em>Genesis </em>to <em>Esther</em>)</p><p><strong>Tuesday: </strong>Jesus’ life and teaching (<em>Matthew </em>to <em>John</em>)</p><p><strong>Wednesday: </strong>Early Christianity (<em>Acts</em>)</p><p><strong>Thursday: </strong>Prophecy and moral guidance (<em>Isaiah </em>to <em>Malachi, Revelation</em>)</p><p><strong>Friday: </strong>Moving poetry and song (<em>Job, Psalms, Song of Solomon</em>)</p><p><strong>Saturday: </strong>Wisdom for living (<em>Proverbs, Ecclesiastes</em>)</p><p><strong>Sunday: </strong>Letters to the congregations (<em>Romans </em>to <em>Jude</em>)</p><p>  Whatever order you choose, be sure to keep track of what you read! Put a <strong>✔ </strong>next to each chapter after you finish it, or in some other way make a record of the chapters that you’ve read.</p><p><strong>Clip this, and keep it in your Bible!</strong></p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Diagram on page 24]</strong></p><p><strong>MAKE THE SCRIPTURES LIVE!</strong></p><p>Get involved in what you read. For example:</p><p>□ Convert lists of names into <strong>family trees.</strong></p><p>□ Create <strong>diagrams. </strong>For instance, as you read about a faithful character, connect that person’s qualities and acts with the blessings he or she received.<wbr />—Proverbs 28:20.</p><p><strong>[Diagram]</strong></p><p>God’s Friend</p><p><strong>↑    </strong>Obedient</p><p><strong>↑    </strong>Faithful</p><p><strong>↑     ↑</strong></p><p>Abraham</p><p>□ Draw <strong>pictures </strong>to illustrate the account.</p><p>□ Draw a <strong>storyboard, </strong>a series of simple pictures to illustrate a sequence of events. Describe what’s happening in each scene.</p><p>□ Build a <strong>scale model </strong>of structures, such as Noah’s ark.<wbr />—For example, see <em>Awake! </em>of January 2007, page 22.</p><p>□ <strong>Read aloud </strong>with friends or family members. Suggestion: Assign one person to read the narration. Others can take on character parts.</p><p>□ Select an account, and turn it into a <strong>news story. </strong>Report the event from several perspectives by including “interviews” with the main characters and eyewitnesses.</p><p>□ Take an account in which a character made an unwise decision and <strong>imagine a different ending! </strong>For example, consider Peter’s denial of Jesus. (Mark 14:66-72) How could Peter have better responded to the pressure?</p><p>□ Watch or listen to <strong>recordings </strong>of Bible dramas.</p><p>□ <strong>Write your own drama. </strong>Include lessons that can be learned from the account.<wbr />—Romans 15:4.</p><p><strong>IDEA: </strong>Perform this drama with a small group of your friends.</p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Picture on page 25]</strong></p><p><strong>TO GET MOTIVATED</strong></p><p>▪ Set a goal! Write below a date by which you would like to start your Bible-reading program.</p><p>․․․․․</p><p>▪ Choose a portion of the Bible that interests you. (See the box “In What Order Will You Read the Bible?”) Then write below which part of the Bible you will read first.</p><p>․․․․․</p><p>▪ Begin with a small amount of time. Even 15 minutes of Bible reading is better than no time at all. Write below how much time you can set aside for this activity.</p><p>․․․․․</p><p><strong>Suggestion: </strong>Keep a study Bible. Write notes in it. Mark verses that are especially meaningful to you.</p><p><strong>[Box/<wbr />Pictures on page 25]</strong></p><p><strong>WHAT YOUR PEERS SAY</strong></p><p>  “I try to read a little of the Bible each night before I go to bed. This gives me something good to think about as I fall asleep.”<wbr />—Megan.</p><p>  “I focus on one verse for 15 minutes. I’ll read every footnote, look up every cross-reference, and do additional research. Sometimes I don’t finish a verse in one sitting, but I get so much out of my reading with this method!”<wbr />—Corey.</p><p>  “Once, I read the Bible in 10 months. With that pace I saw connections between different parts of the Bible that I’d never noticed before.”<wbr />—John.</p><p><strong>[Box on page 25]</strong></p><p><strong>YOU GET TO CHOOSE!</strong></p><p>□ <strong>Pick an event. </strong>The Bible is packed with real-life drama. Pick an account that interests you, and read it from beginning to end.</p><p><strong>Suggestion: </strong>For ideas on how to get even more out of the account, see page 292 of the book <em>Questions Young People Ask<wbr />—Answers That Work, </em>Volume 2, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.</p><p>□ <strong>Pick a Gospel. </strong>Read Matthew (the first Gospel written), Mark (noted for being fast-moving and action-packed), Luke (which gives special attention to prayer and to women), or John (which covers very little of what is stated in the other Gospels).</p><p><strong>Suggestion: </strong>Before reading, briefly look up information about the Bible book and its writer so that you can better understand what makes that Gospel unique.</p><p>□ <strong>Pick a psalm. </strong>For example:</p><p>If you feel alone and friendless, read Psalm 142.</p><p>If you’re discouraged over your weaknesses, read Psalm 51.</p><p>If you question the value of God’s standards, read Psalm 73.</p><p><strong>Suggestion: </strong>Keep a list of psalms you’ve read that are particularly encouraging to <em>you.</em></p><p><strong>[Box on page 26]</strong></p><p><strong>DIG DEEPER</strong></p><p>▪ <strong>Consider the setting. </strong>Examine the timing, location, and circumstances surrounding a passage.</p><p><strong>Example: </strong><em>Read Ezekiel 14:14. </em>About what age may Daniel have been when Jehovah mentioned him as a good example alongside Noah and Job?</p><p><strong>Clue: </strong>Ezekiel chapter 14 was recorded just five years after Daniel was exiled to Babylon<wbr />—likely as a teenager.</p><p><strong>The hidden gem: </strong>Was Daniel too young for Jehovah to notice his faithfulness? What good decisions led to blessings for him? (Daniel 1:8-17) How can Daniel’s example help <em>you </em>to make good decisions?</p><p>▪ <strong>Analyze details. </strong>Sometimes just a word or two is significant.</p><p><strong>Example: </strong><em>Compare Matthew 28:7 with Mark 16:7. </em>Why did Mark include the detail that Jesus would soon appear to the disciples <em>“and Peter”?</em></p><p><strong>Clue: </strong>Mark was not an eyewitness of these events; evidently, he got his information from Peter.</p><p><strong>The hidden gem: </strong>Why must Peter have felt reassured to hear that Jesus wanted to see him again? (Mark 14:66-72) How did Jesus prove himself a real friend to Peter? How can you imitate Jesus and be a real friend to others?</p><p>▪ <strong>Do further research. </strong>Consult Bible literature for explanations.</p><p><strong>Example: </strong><em>Read Matthew 2:7-15. </em>When did the astrologers visit Jesus?</p><p><strong>Clue: </strong>See <em>The Watchtower </em>of January 1, 2008, page 31, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.</p><p><strong>The hidden gem: </strong>How, evidently, did Jehovah provide materially for Jesus’ family while they were in Egypt? How can trust in God help you to cope with stressful circumstances?<wbr />—Matthew 6:33, 34.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
