<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 August 22-28</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016289.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 106:1-109:31)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Praise Jah!* Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty acts Or proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds?  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Happy are those who act with justice, Who always do what is right.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor* toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones, That I may rejoice along with your nation, That I may proudly praise* you along with your inheritance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>We have sinned just as our forefathers did; We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate* your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love, But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But he saved them for the sake of his name, To make his mightiness known.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; He led them through its depths as through a desert;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He saved them from the hand of their foe And reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The waters covered their adversaries; Not one of them survived.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then they had faith in his promise; They began to sing his praise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness; They tested God in the desert. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave them what they requested, But then struck them with disease that made them* waste away. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>In the camp they grew jealous of Moses And of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The earth then opened up and swallowed Daʹthan And covered those assembled with A·biʹram. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A fire blazed among their group; A flame consumed the wicked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>They made a calf in Hoʹreb And bowed down to a statue of metal;* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>They exchanged my glory For the representation of a grass-eating bull. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They forgot God their Savior, Who did great things in Egypt, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Wonderful works in the land of Ham, Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He was about to order their annihilation, But Moses his chosen one interceded with him* To avert his destructive anger. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Then they despised the desirable land; They had no faith in his promise. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>They kept grumbling in their tents; They did not listen to the voice of Jehovah. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>So he raised his hand in an oath concerning them That he would make them fall in the wilderness; <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>He would make their descendants fall among the nations, And he would scatter them throughout the lands. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Then they joined in worship of* Baʹal of Peʹor, And they ate sacrifices offered to the dead.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>They provoked Him by their actions, And a scourge broke out among them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened, The scourge was halted. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And it was counted to him as righteousness Through all generations forever. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>They provoked Him at the waters of Merʹi·bah,* And it went badly for Moses because of them. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>They embittered his spirit, And he spoke rashly with his lips. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>They did not annihilate the peoples, As Jehovah had commanded them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>But they mingled with the nations And adopted* their ways. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>They kept serving their idols, And these became a snare to them. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>They would sacrifice their sons And their daughters to demons. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>They kept spilling innocent blood, The blood of their own sons and daughters Whom they sacrificed to the idols of Caʹnaan; And the land was polluted with bloodshed. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>They became unclean by their works; They committed spiritual prostitution by their deeds. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>So the anger of Jehovah blazed against his people, And he grew to detest his inheritance. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>He repeatedly handed them over to the nations, So that those who hated them might rule over them. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Their enemies oppressed them, And they were subject to their power.* <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Many times he rescued them, But they would rebel and disobey, And they would be brought low for their error. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>But he would see their distress And hear their cry for help. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>For their sake he would remember his covenant, And he would feel pity,* moved by his great* loyal love. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He would cause them to be pitied By all who held them captive. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Save us, O Jehovah our God, And gather us from the nations So that we may give thanks to your holy name And exult in praising you.* <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praised Throughout all eternity.* And let all the people say, “Amen!”* Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>107 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let those reclaimed* by Jehovah say this, Those whom he reclaimed from the hand* of the adversary,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Whom he gathered together from the lands, From the east and from the west,* From the north and from the south.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They wandered about in the wilderness, in the desert; They did not find a way to a city where they could live.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They were hungry and thirsty; They were* faint from exhaustion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They kept crying out to Jehovah in their distress; He rescued them from their plight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He had them walk in the right way To come to a city where they could live.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For he has satisfied the thirsty* And filled the hungry* with good things. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Some were living in deepest darkness, Prisoners in affliction and in irons. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For they had rebelled against the word of God; They disrespected the counsel of the Most High. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So he humbled their hearts through hardship; They stumbled, and there was no one to help them. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They called to Jehovah for help in their distress; He saved them from their plight. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He brought them out of deepest darkness, And he tore off their shackles. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For he has broken down the doors of copper And cut through the bars of iron. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>They were foolish and suffered affliction On account of their transgressions and their errors. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They lost their appetite for* all food; They drew near the gates of death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>They would call to Jehovah for help in their distress; He would save them from their plight. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He would send his word and heal them And rescue them from the pits they were trapped in. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving And declare his works with a joyful cry. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Those who travel on the sea in ships, Who ply their trade over the vast waters, <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They have seen the works of Jehovah And his wonderful works in the deep; <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>How by his word a windstorm arises, Lifting up the waves of the sea. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They rise up to the sky; They plunge down to the depths. Their courage* melts away because of the impending calamity. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>They reel and stagger like a drunken man, And all their skill proves useless. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Then they cry out to Jehovah in their distress, And he rescues them from their plight. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He calms the windstorm; The waves of the sea grow quiet. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>They rejoice when these grow still, And he leads them to their desired harbor. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, And let them praise him in the council* of the elders. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He turns rivers into a desert And springs of water into parched ground, <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Fruitful land into salty wasteland, Because of the wickedness of those dwelling in it. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He turns the desert into reedy pools of water, And dry land into springs of water. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>He causes the hungry to dwell there, So that they may establish a city where they can live. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>They sow fields and plant vineyards That yield fruitful crops. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>He blesses them and they increase greatly; He does not let their cattle diminish. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>But again they become few and are humiliated Because of oppression, calamity, and grief. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>He pours out contempt upon nobles And makes them wander in trackless wastelands. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>But he protects* the poor from oppression And makes their families as numerous as a flock. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>The upright see this and rejoice; But all the unrighteous shut their mouths. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Whoever is wise will observe these things And will carefully consider Jehovah’s acts of loyal love. </p><p>A song. A melody of David. <strong>108 </strong>My heart is steadfast, O God. I will sing and make music with my whole being.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp. I will awaken the dawn.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah, And I will sing praises* to you among the nations.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens, And your faithfulness, up to the skies.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Be exalted above the heavens, O God; May your glory be over all the earth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God has spoken in his holiness:* “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley* of Sucʹcoth.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet* for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies? <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries. </p><p>To the director. Of David. A melody. <strong>109 </strong>O God whom I praise, do not remain silent.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For the wicked and the deceitful open their mouths against me. They speak about me with lying tongues;  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They surround me with hateful words, And they attack me without cause.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They resist me in response to my love; But I continue to pray.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They repay me with bad for good And hatred for my love.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Appoint a wicked man over him; May a resister* stand at his right hand.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When he is judged, may he be found guilty;* May even his prayer be counted as a sin.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let his days be few; His office of oversight let someone else take.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Let his children* become fatherless, And his wife, a widow. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>May his children* become wandering beggars, Foraging for food from their ruined homes. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May his creditor seize* all that he has, And may strangers plunder his possessions. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>May no one extend kindness* to him, And may no one show favor to his fatherless children. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Let his descendants* be cut off; May their name be erased within a generation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Let the error of his forefathers be remembered by Jehovah, And may the sin of his mother not be erased. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May Jehovah always be mindful of what they have done; And may he cut off the memory of them from the earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For he did not remember to show kindness,* But he kept pursuing the oppressed, poor, and brokenhearted man To put him to death. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He loved to pronounce a curse, so that is what came upon him; He had no desire to bless, so he received no blessing. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He was clothed with curses as his garment. And they were poured into his body like water, Into his bones like oil. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his curses be like the clothing in which he wraps himself And like a belt he always wears. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This is the payment from Jehovah for the one who resists me And for those who speak evil things against me.* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But you, Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, Act in my behalf for the sake of your name. Rescue me, because your loyal love is good. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For I am helpless and poor, And my heart has been pierced within me. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>I am passing away like a fading shadow; I have been shaken off like a locust. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My knees give way from fasting; My body is thin, and I am wasting away.* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I have become the object of their taunts. When they see me, they shake their heads. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Help me, O Jehovah my God; Save me by your loyal love. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>May they know that this is by your hand; That you, O Jehovah, have done it. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Let them pronounce a curse, but may you give a blessing. When they rise up against me, may they be put to shame, But let your servant rejoice. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Let those who resist me be clothed with humiliation; May they be wrapped in their shame as in a robe.* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>My mouth will fervently praise Jehovah; I will praise him in front of many people. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>For he will stand at the right hand of the poor To save him from those who condemn him.*</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “may boast about.”</p><p>Or “grasp the meaning of.”</p><p>Or “wilderness.”</p><p>Or “was left.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Or “molten statue.”</p><p>Lit., “stood in the breach before him.”</p><p>Or “attached themselves to.”</p><p>That is, sacrifices offered either to dead people or to lifeless gods.</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Or “learned.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Or “feel regret.”</p><p>Or “abundant.”</p><p>Or “exult in your praise.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “So be it!”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “repurchased.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “From sunrise and from sunset.”</p><p>Or “Their soul was.”</p><p>Or “the parched soul.”</p><p>Or “the hungry soul.”</p><p>Or “Their soul detested.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “seat.”</p><p>Or “puts on high,” that is, out of reach.</p><p>Lit., “even my glory.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in his holy place.”</p><p>Or “Low Plain.”</p><p>Lit., “stronghold.”</p><p>Or “an accuser.”</p><p>Or “wicked.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Or “May usurers lay out traps for.”</p><p>Or “loyal love.”</p><p>Or “posterity.”</p><p>Or “loyal love.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “My flesh has grown lean, without fatness (oil).”</p><p>Or “sleeveless coat.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016289.xhtml#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 106:1-22)</strong></a> <span id="citation10"></span>Praise Jah!* Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty acts Or proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds?  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Happy are those who act with justice, Who always do what is right.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor* toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones, That I may rejoice along with your nation, That I may proudly praise* you along with your inheritance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>We have sinned just as our forefathers did; We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate* your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love, But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But he saved them for the sake of his name, To make his mightiness known.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; He led them through its depths as through a desert;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He saved them from the hand of their foe And reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The waters covered their adversaries; Not one of them survived.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then they had faith in his promise; They began to sing his praise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness; They tested God in the desert. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave them what they requested, But then struck them with disease that made them* waste away. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>In the camp they grew jealous of Moses And of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The earth then opened up and swallowed Daʹthan And covered those assembled with A·biʹram. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A fire blazed among their group; A flame consumed the wicked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>They made a calf in Hoʹreb And bowed down to a statue of metal;* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>They exchanged my glory For the representation of a grass-eating bull. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They forgot God their Savior, Who did great things in Egypt, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Wonderful works in the land of Ham, Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “may boast about.”</p><p>Or “grasp the meaning of.”</p><p>Or “wilderness.”</p><p>Or “was left.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Or “molten statue.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 2 We Thank You, Jehovah***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 2</p>
<h1><strong>We Thank You, Jehovah</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">1 Thessalonians 5:18</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. We thank you, Jehovah, each day and each night,</p>
<p class="p5">That you shed upon us your precious light.</p>
<p class="p6">We thank you that we have the priv’lege of prayer,</p>
<p class="p7">That we can approach you with ev’ry care.</p>
<p class="p8">2. We thank you, Jehovah, for your loving Son,</p>
<p class="p9">Who conquered the world; By his faith he won.</p>
<p class="p10">We thank you for guidance in doing your will,</p>
<p class="p11">For thus you do help us our vows fulfill.</p>
<p class="p12">3. We thank you, our God, for the honor to preach</p>
<p class="p13">About your great name and the truth to teach.</p>
<p class="p14">We thank you that soon all earth’s woes will be past,</p>
<p class="p15">While your Kingdom blessings forever last.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p16">(See also <span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Ps. 50:14;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> 95:2;</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> 147:7;</a><span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16"> Col. 3:15</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(1 Thess. 5:18)</strong></a> Give thanks for everything. This is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Ps. 50:14)</strong></a> Offer thanksgiving as your sacrifice to God, And pay your vows to the Most High;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Ps. 95:2)</strong></a> Let us come into his presence* with thanksgiving; Let us sing and shout in triumph to him.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “before his face.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Ps. 147:7)</strong></a> Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving; Sing praises to our God, accompanied by the harp,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Col. 3:15)</strong></a> Also, let the peace of the Christ rule in your hearts,* for you were called to that peace in one body. And show yourselves thankful.</p><p></p><p>Or “control your hearts.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w15 1/15 p. 8 Give Thanks to Jehovah and Be Blessed***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p6">How can reflecting on our blessings help us to cope with trials?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>1. </strong>Why is Jehovah worthy of our thanks?</p>
<p class="p7">JEHOVAH, the Giver of “every good gift and every perfect present,” is indeed worthy of our thanks. (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Jas. 1:17</a>) As our loving Shepherd, he tenderly cares for all our physical and spiritual needs. (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Ps. 23:1-3</a>) He has proved to be “our refuge and strength”<wbr />—especially in times of distress! (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Ps. 46:1</a>) Surely we have many reasons to agree wholeheartedly with the psalmist who wrote: “Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; his loyal love endures forever.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Ps. 106:1</a>.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p44">Our yeartext for 2015: “Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Psalm 106:1</a></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 1:17)</strong> Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, coming down from the Father of the celestial lights, who does not vary or change like the shifting shadows.*</p><p></p><p>Or “with whom there is not a variation of the turning of the shadow.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 23:1-3)</strong> Jehovah is my Shepherd. I will lack nothing.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In grassy pastures he makes me lie down; He leads me to well-watered resting-places.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He refreshes me.* He leads me in the paths* of righteousness for the sake of his name.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “to tranquil waters.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “tracks.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 46:1)</strong> God is our refuge and strength, A help that is readily found in times of distress.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 106:1)</strong> Praise Jah!* Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Ps. 106:1)</strong></a> Praise Jah!* Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w02 6/1 p. 18 Find Delight in Jehovah’s Righteousness***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">19. What blessings can be ours if we find delight in God’s righteousness?</p>
<p class="p25"><sup>19 </sup>In these perilous and uncertain days, taking delight in Jehovah’s righteousness is a source of security and protection. To the question: “O Jehovah, who will be a guest in your tent? Who will reside in your holy mountain?” King David answered: “He who is walking faultlessly and practicing righteousness.” (<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Psalm 15:1, 2</a>) By pursuing God’s righteousness and finding delight in it, we can maintain a good relationship with him and continue to enjoy his favor and blessing. Thus, ours is a life of contentment, self-respect, and peace of mind. “He that is pursuing righteousness and loving-kindness will find life, righteousness and glory,” says God’s Word. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Proverbs 21:21</a>) Furthermore, trying our best to do what is just and right in all our endeavors means happy personal relationships and an improved quality of life<wbr />—morally and spiritually. The psalmist declared: “Happy are those observing justice, doing righteousness all the time.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Psalm 106:3</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 15:1, 2)</strong> O Jehovah, who may be a guest in your tent? Who may reside in your holy mountain?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The one who is walking faultlessly,* Practicing what is right And speaking the truth in his heart.</p><p></p><p>Or “with integrity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 21:21)</strong> Whoever pursues righteousness and loyal love Will find life, righteousness, and glory.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 106:3)</strong> Happy are those who act with justice, Who always do what is right.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w15 1/15 pp. 8-9 Give Thanks to Jehovah and Be Blessed***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>2, 3. </strong>(a) What are the dangers of taking our blessings for granted? (b) What questions will we consider in this article?</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Why is it important for us to consider this matter of giving thanks? As foretold, people in these last days have become increasingly unthankful. (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">2 Tim. 3:2</a>) Many take their blessings for granted. Influenced by the commercial world and its advertising, millions of people strive to obtain more instead of being content with what they have. We too can be affected by this unappreciative spirit. Like the ancient Israelites, we could become ungrateful and lose appreciation for our precious relationship with Jehovah and for the blessings that we have received from him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Ps. 106:7,</a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> 11-13</a>.</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then, too, consider what can happen when we undergo difficult trials. At such times, we could easily become overwhelmed and lose sight of our blessings. (<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Ps. 116:3</a>) Therefore, how can we cultivate a grateful heart and maintain it? And what will help us to remain positive even when we are undergoing severe trials? Let us see.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:2)</strong> For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 106:7)</strong> Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate* your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love, But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.</p><p></p><p>Or “grasp the meaning of.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 106:11-13)</strong> The waters covered their adversaries; Not one of them survived.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then they had faith in his promise; They began to sing his praise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel.</p><p></p><p>Or “was left.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 116:3)</strong> The ropes of death encircled me; The Grave had me in its grip.* I was overcome by distress and grief.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “The distresses of Sheol found me.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w01 6/15 p. 13 Do Not Become Forgetful Hearers***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 1. What miracles were the people of ancient Israel privileged to witness?</p>
<p class="p3">“UNFORGETTABLE” would be a good word to describe the miracles performed by Jehovah in ancient Egypt. Each one of the Ten Plagues was undeniably awesome. Those blows were followed by the amazing deliverance of the people of Israel through the parted waters of the Red Sea. (<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Deuteronomy 34:10-12</a>) If you had been an eyewitness of those events, hopefully you would never have forgotten the One responsible for them. Yet, the psalmist sang: “They [the Israelites] forgot God their Savior, the Doer of great things in Egypt, wonderful works in the land of Ham, fear-inspiring things at the Red Sea.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Psalm 106:21, 22</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 2. What shows that Israel’s appreciation for God’s mighty acts was short-lived?</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>After crossing the Red Sea, the Israelites “began to fear Jehovah and to put faith in Jehovah.” (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Exodus 14:31</a>) The men of Israel joined Moses in a victory song to Jehovah, and Miriam and other women responded by playing tambourines and dancing. (<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Exodus 15:1,</a><span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33"> 20</a>) Yes, God’s people were impressed with Jehovah’s mighty acts. But their appreciation for the One who performed those acts was short-lived. Soon afterward many of them behaved as though they had suffered a major memory loss. They became murmurers and complainers against Jehovah. Some engaged in idolatry and sexual immorality.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Numbers 14:27;</a><span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35"> 25:1-9</a>.</p>
<p class="p5"><strong>What Could Make Us Forget?</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 3. Because of our imperfect nature, what could we forget?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>3 </sup>Israel’s lack of appreciation is indeed perplexing. Still, the same thing could happen to us. True, we have not witnessed such divine miracles. In our relationship with God, however, there surely have been occasions that were unforgettable. Some of us may remember when we accepted the truth from the Bible. Other joyful times may include our prayer of dedication to Jehovah and our water baptism as true Christians. Many of us have experienced Jehovah’s helping hand at other points in our life. (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Psalm 118:15</a>) Above all, through the sacrificial death of God’s own Son, Jesus Christ, we have received the hope of salvation. (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">John 3:16</a>) Nevertheless, because of our imperfect nature, when faced with wrong desires and the anxieties of life, we may too easily forget the good things that Jehovah has done for us.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 34:10-12)</strong> But there has never again arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face-to-face. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>He performed all the signs and the miracles that Jehovah had sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharʹaoh and all his servants and all his land, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>along with the mighty hand and the awesome power that Moses displayed before the eyes of all Israel.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 106:21, 22)</strong> They forgot God their Savior, Who did great things in Egypt, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Wonderful works in the land of Ham, Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 14:31)</strong> Israel also saw the great power* that Jehovah wielded against the Egyptians, and the people began to fear Jehovah and to put faith in Jehovah and in his servant Moses.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 15:1)</strong> At that time Moses and the Israelites sang this song to Jehovah: “Let me sing to Jehovah, for he has become highly exalted. The horse and its rider he has hurled into the sea.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 15:20)</strong> Then Mirʹi·am the prophetess, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women followed her with tambourines and with dances.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Num. 14:27)</strong> “How much longer will this evil assembly keep up this murmuring against me? I have heard what the Israelites are murmuring against me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Num. 25:1-9)</strong> When Israel was dwelling in Shitʹtim, the people started to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moʹab. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The women invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people began to eat and to bow down to their gods. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>So Israel joined in worship of* the Baʹal of Peʹor, and Jehovah became enraged with Israel. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah said to Moses: “Take all the leaders* of these people and hang them up before Jehovah in broad daylight,* that the burning anger of Jehovah may turn back from Israel.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then Moses said to the judges of Israel: “Each one of you should kill his men who joined in worship of* the Baʹal of Peʹor.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>But just then, there came one of the Israelites bringing near to his brothers a Midʹi·an·ite woman before the eyes of Moses and of all the assembly of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of meeting. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When Phinʹe·has the son of El·e·aʹzar the son of Aaron the priest saw it, he immediately rose up from the midst of the assembly and took a spear* in his hand. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then he went after the man of Israel into the tent and pierced both of them through, the man of Israel and the woman through her genital parts. At that the scourge on the Israelites was halted. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Those who died from the scourge amounted to 24,000.</p><p></p><p>Or “attached itself to.”</p><p>Lit., “heads.”</p><p>Lit., “in front of the sun.”</p><p>Or “attached themselves to.”</p><p>Or “lance.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 118:15)</strong> The sound of rejoicing and salvation* Is in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power.</p><p></p><p>Or “victory.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(John 3:16)</strong> “For God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, so that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w11 10/15 pp. 5-6 Let Us Rejoice Together!***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p4">The situation of fellow Christians, however, is different, and so is their spirit. The apostle Paul wrote: “Always be rejoicing.” (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">1 Thess. 5:16</a>) There are many reasons for us to be joyful and to rejoice together. We worship the Most High God, Jehovah; we understand the Bible’s message of truth; we have the hope of salvation and eternal life; and we can also help others to attain the same blessings.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Ps. 106:4, 5;</a><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"> Jer. 15:16;</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> Rom. 12:12</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(1 Thess. 5:16)</strong></a> Always be rejoicing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Ps. 106:4, 5)</strong></a> Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor* toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones, That I may rejoice along with your nation, That I may proudly praise* you along with your inheritance.</p><p></p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “may boast about.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Jer. 15:16)</strong></a> Your words were found, and I ate them; And your word became to me the exultation and the rejoicing of my heart, For your name has been called on me, O Jehovah God of armies.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Rom. 12:12)</strong></a> Rejoice in the hope. Endure under tribulation. Persevere in prayer.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w03 12/1 pp. 15-16 “Show Yourselves Thankful”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Reasons for Being Thankful</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 3. For what are we thankful to Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>3 </sup>It is to Jehovah God, our Creator and Life-Giver, that we owe our gratitude, especially as we consider some of the bounteous gifts he has showered upon us. (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">James 1:17</a>) Daily, we thank Jehovah that we are alive. (<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Psalm 36:9</a>) Around us, we observe abundant evidence of Jehovah’s handiwork, such as the sun, moon, and stars. Our planet’s rich storehouse of life-sustaining minerals, the atmosphere’s finely balanced mixture of vital gases, and the intricate cycles in nature all testify to the debt we owe our loving heavenly Father. “Many things you yourself have done, O Jehovah my God,” sang King David, “even your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us; there is none to be compared to you. Were I inclined to tell and speak of them, they have become more numerous than I can recount.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Psalm 40:5</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 4. Why should we thank Jehovah for the happy association we enjoy in our congregations?</p>
<p class="p7"><sup>4 </sup>Though far removed from a physical paradise, Jehovah’s servants today relish living in a spiritual paradise. In our Kingdom Halls and at our conventions and assemblies, we experience the fruitage of God’s spirit at work in our fellow believers. Indeed, when preaching to people who have little or no religious background, some Witnesses refer to what Paul described in his letter to the Galatians. They first draw attention to “the works of the flesh” and ask their listeners what they have observed. (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Galatians 5:19-23</a>) Most readily agree that these characterize human society today. When shown the description of the fruitage of God’s spirit and upon being invited to the local Kingdom Hall to see evidence of this for themselves, many quickly acknowledge: “God is really among you.” (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">1 Corinthians 14:25</a>) And this is not limited to the local Kingdom Hall. Travel where you may, when you meet any of the more than six million Witnesses of Jehovah, you find the same happy, joyous spirit. Truly, this upbuilding association is reason for giving thanks to Jehovah, the one who supplies his spirit to make it possible.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Zephaniah 3:9;</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> Ephesians 3:20, 21</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">5, 6. How can we show ourselves thankful for God’s greatest gift, the ransom?</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>The greatest gift, the most perfect present that Jehovah has bestowed, is that of his Son, Jesus, by means of whom the ransom sacrifice was provided. “If this is how God loved us,” wrote the apostle John, “then we are ourselves under obligation to love one another.” (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">1 John 4:11</a>) Yes, we show ourselves thankful for the ransom not only by expressing love and gratitude to Jehovah but also by living our lives in a way that manifests love for others.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">Matthew 22:37-39</a>.</p>
<p class="p9"><sup>6 </sup>We can learn more about showing gratitude by considering the way Jehovah dealt with Israel of old. By means of the Law, which he gave to the nation through Moses, Jehovah taught the people many lessons. Through “the framework of the knowledge and of the truth in the Law,” we can learn much that will help us follow Paul’s counsel: “Show yourselves thankful.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Romans 2:20;</a><span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52"> Colossians 3:15</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 1:17)</strong> Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, coming down from the Father of the celestial lights, who does not vary or change like the shifting shadows.*</p><p></p><p>Or “with whom there is not a variation of the turning of the shadow.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 36:9)</strong> With you is the source of life; By your light we can see light.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 40:5)</strong> How many things you have done, O Jehovah my God, Your wonderful works and your thoughts toward us. None can compare to you; If I were to try to tell and speak of them, They would be too numerous to recount!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Gal. 5:19-23)</strong> Now the works of the flesh are plainly seen, and they are sexual immorality,* uncleanness, brazen conduct,* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>idolatry, spiritism,* hostility, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, dissensions, divisions, sects, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>envy, drunkenness, wild parties,* and things like these. I am forewarning you about these things, the same way I already warned you, that those who practice such things will not inherit God’s Kingdom. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>On the other hand, the fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,* kindness, goodness, faith, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.</p><p></p><p>Greek, <em>por·neiʹa. </em>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “shameless conduct.” Greek, <em>a·selʹgei·a. </em>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “sorcery; druggery.”</p><p>Or “revelries.”</p><p>Or “long-suffering.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 14:25)</strong> The secrets of his heart then become evident, so that he will fall facedown and worship God, declaring: “God is really among you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Zeph. 3:9)</strong> For then I will change the language of the peoples to a pure language, So that all of them may call on the name of Jehovah, To serve him shoulder to shoulder.’*</p><p></p><p>Or “worship him in unity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 3:20, 21)</strong> Now to the one who can, according to his power that is operating in us, do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>to him be the glory by means of the congregation and by means of Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(1 John 4:11)</strong> Beloved ones, if this is how God loved us, then we are also under obligation to love one another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 22:37-39)</strong> He said to him: “‘You must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind.’ <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>This is the greatest and first commandment. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 2:20)</strong> a corrector of the unreasonable ones, a teacher of young children, and having the framework of the knowledge and of the truth in the Law—</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Col. 3:15)</strong> Also, let the peace of the Christ rule in your hearts,* for you were called to that peace in one body. And show yourselves thankful.</p><p></p><p>Or “control your hearts.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w00 12/15 p. 24 Stand Complete With Firm Conviction***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">20. If a relatively few deflect from the Christian way, why need this be no cause for discouragement?</p>
<p class="p24"><sup>20 </sup>You should not be distracted or discouraged by the fact that not all stand complete and with firm conviction. Some may fail, be deflected, or simply give up. That happened among those closest to Jesus, his apostles. But when Judas turned traitor, did the other apostles slow down or quit? No, indeed! Peter applied <span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Psalm 109:8</a> to show that another would take Judas’ place. A replacement was selected, and God’s loyal ones actively got on with their preaching assignment. (<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Acts 1:15-26</a>) They were determined to stand complete with firm conviction.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 109:8)</strong> Let his days be few; His office of oversight let someone else take.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Acts 1:15-26)</strong> During those days Peter stood up in the midst of the brothers (the number* of people was altogether about 120) and said: <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>“Men, brothers, it was necessary for the scripture to be fulfilled that the holy spirit spoke prophetically through David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For he had been numbered among us and he obtained a share in this ministry. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>(This very man, therefore, purchased a field with the wages for unrighteousness, and falling headfirst, his body burst open* and all his insides spilled out. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>This became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their language <em>A·kelʹda·ma, </em>that is, “Field of Blood.”) <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘Let his dwelling become desolate, and let there be no inhabitant in it’ and, ‘His office of oversight let someone else take.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>It is therefore necessary that of the men who accompanied us during all the time in which the Lord Jesus carried on his activities* among us, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>starting with his baptism by John until the day he was taken up from us, one of these men should become a witness with us of his resurrection.” <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So they proposed two, Joseph called Barʹsab·bas, who was also called Justus, and Mat·thiʹas. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Then they prayed and said: “You, O Jehovah,* who know the hearts of all, designate which one of these two men you have chosen <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>to take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas deviated to go to his own place.” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>So they cast lots over them, and the lot fell to Mat·thiʹas, and he was counted* along with the 11 apostles.</p><p></p><p>Or “crowd.”</p><p>Or “he burst open in the middle.”</p><p>Lit., “went in and out.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “reckoned,” that is, viewed the same as the other 11.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***it-1 pp. 857-858 Foreknowledge, Foreordination***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p43"><strong><em>Did God predestine Judas to betray Jesus in order to fulfill prophecy?</em></strong></p>
<p class="p44">The traitorous course of Judas Iscariot fulfilled divine prophecy and demonstrated Jehovah’s foreknowledge as well as that of his Son. (<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Ps 41:9;</a><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"> 55:12, 13;</a><span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57"> 109:8;</a><span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58"> Ac 1:16-20</a>) Yet it cannot be said that God foreordained or predestinated Judas himself to such a course. The prophecies foretold that some intimate acquaintance of Jesus would be his betrayer, but they did not specify which of those sharing such acquaintance it would be. Again, Bible principles rule against God’s having foreordained Judas’ actions. The divine standard stated by the apostle is: “Never lay your hands hastily upon any man; neither be a sharer in the sins of others; preserve yourself chaste.” (<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">1Ti 5:22</a>; compare <span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">3:6</a>.) Evidencing his concern that the selection of his 12 apostles be wisely and properly made, Jesus spent the night in prayer to his Father before making known his decision. (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Lu 6:12-16</a>) If Judas were already divinely foreordained to be a traitor, this would result in inconsistency in God’s direction and guidance and, according to the rule, would make him a sharer in the sins that one committed.</p>
<p class="p45">Thus, it seems evident that at the time of his being selected as an apostle, Judas’ heart presented no definite evidence of a treasonous attitude. He allowed a ‘poisonous root to spring up’ and defile him, resulting in his deviation and in his accepting, not God’s direction, but the Devil’s leading in a course of thievery and treachery. (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Heb 12:14, 15;</a><span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63"> Joh 13:2;</a><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"> Ac 1:24, 25;</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> Jas 1:14, 15</a>; see JUDAS No. 4.) By the time such deviation reached a certain point, Jesus himself could read Judas’ heart and foretell his betrayal.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Joh 13:10, 11</a>.</p>
<p class="p46">True, in the account at <span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">John 6:64</a>, on the occasion of some disciples stumbling over certain teachings of Jesus, we read that “from the beginning [“from the outset,” <em>JB</em>] Jesus knew who were the ones not believing and who was the one that would betray him.” While the word “beginning” (Gr., <em>ar·kheʹ</em>) is used at <span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">2 Peter 3:4</a> to refer to the start of creation, it can also refer to other times. (<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Lu 1:2;</a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> Joh 15:27</a>) For example, when the apostle Peter spoke of the holy spirit falling on Gentiles “just as it did also upon us in the beginning,” he obviously was not referring to the beginning of his discipleship or apostleship but to an important point in his ministry, the day of Pentecost, 33 C.E., “the beginning” of the outpouring of the holy spirit for a certain purpose. (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Ac 11:15;</a><span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"> 2:1-4</a>) It is therefore interesting to note this comment on <span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">John 6:64</a> in Lange’s <em>Commentary on the Holy Scriptures </em>(p. 227): “Beginning . . . means not, metaphysically from the beginning of all things, . . . nor from the beginning of His [Jesus’] acquaintance with each one, . . . nor from the beginning of His collecting of the disciples around Him, or the beginning of His Messianic ministry, . . . but from the first secret germs of unbelief [that produced the stumbling of some disciples]. So also He knew His betrayer from the beginning.”<wbr />—Translated and edited by P. Schaff, 1976; compare <span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">1Jo 3:8,</a><span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75"> 11, 12</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(Ps. 41:9)</strong></a> Even the man at peace with me, one whom I trusted, Who was eating my bread, has lifted his heel against me.*</p><p></p><p>Or “turned against me.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Ps. 55:12, 13)</strong></a> For it is not an enemy who taunts me; Otherwise I could put up with it. It is not a foe who has risen up against me; Otherwise I could conceal myself from him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But it is you, a man like me,* My own companion whom I know well.</p><p></p><p>Or “a man, my equal.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <strong>(Ps. 109:8)</strong></a> Let his days be few; His office of oversight let someone else take.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Acts 1:16-20)</strong></a> “Men, brothers, it was necessary for the scripture to be fulfilled that the holy spirit spoke prophetically through David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For he had been numbered among us and he obtained a share in this ministry. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>(This very man, therefore, purchased a field with the wages for unrighteousness, and falling headfirst, his body burst open* and all his insides spilled out. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>This became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their language <em>A·kelʹda·ma, </em>that is, “Field of Blood.”) <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘Let his dwelling become desolate, and let there be no inhabitant in it’ and, ‘His office of oversight let someone else take.’</p><p></p><p>Or “he burst open in the middle.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 5:22)</strong></a> Never lay your hands hastily on any man;* neither become a sharer in the sins of others; keep yourself chaste.</p><p></p><p>That is, do not appoint any man hastily.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 3:6)</strong></a> not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Luke 6:12-16)</strong></a> On one of those days he went out to the mountain to pray, and he spent the whole night in prayer to God. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>And when it became day, he called his disciples to him and chose from among them 12, whom he also named apostles: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Simon, whom he also named Peter, Andrew his brother, James, John, Philip, Bar·tholʹo·mew, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Matthew, Thomas, James the son of Al·phaeʹus, Simon who is called “the zealous one,” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Judas the son of James, and Judas Is·carʹi·ot, who turned traitor.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Heb. 12:14, 15)</strong></a> Pursue peace with all people and the sanctification* without which no man will see the Lord. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Carefully watch that no one fails to obtain the undeserved kindness of God, so that no poisonous root springs up to cause trouble and many are defiled by it;</p><p></p><p>Or “holiness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(John 13:2)</strong></a> The evening meal was going on, and the Devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Is·carʹi·ot, the son of Simon, to betray him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Acts 1:24, 25)</strong></a> Then they prayed and said: “You, O Jehovah,* who know the hearts of all, designate which one of these two men you have chosen <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>to take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas deviated to go to his own place.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(Jas. 1:14, 15)</strong></a> But each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed* by his own desire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Then the desire, when it has become fertile,* gives birth to sin; in turn sin, when it has been carried out, brings forth death.</p><p></p><p>Or “caught as by bait.”</p><p>Lit., “has conceived.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(John 13:10, 11)</strong></a> Jesus said to him: “Whoever has bathed does not need to have more than his feet washed, but is completely clean. And you men are clean, but not all of you.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For he knew the man who was betraying him. This is why he said: “Not all of you are clean.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(John 6:64)</strong></a> But there are some of you who do not believe.” For Jesus knew from the beginning those who did not believe and the one who would betray him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 3:4)</strong></a> and saying: “Where is this promised presence of his? Why, from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death, all things are continuing exactly as they were from creation’s beginning.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Luke 1:2)</strong></a> just as these were handed down to us by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and attendants of the message,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(John 15:27)</strong></a> and you, in turn, are to bear witness, because you have been with me from the beginning.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Acts 11:15)</strong></a> But when I started to speak, the holy spirit fell on them just as it did also on us in the beginning.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Acts 2:1-4)</strong></a> Now while the day of the Festival of Pentecost was in progress, they were all together at the same place. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Suddenly there was a noise from heaven, just like that of a rushing, stiff breeze, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And tongues as if of fire became visible to them and were distributed, and one came to rest on each one of them, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>and they all became filled with holy spirit and started to speak in different languages,* just as the spirit enabled them to speak.</p><p></p><p>Or “tongues.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(John 6:64)</strong></a> But there are some of you who do not believe.” For Jesus knew from the beginning those who did not believe and the one who would betray him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(1 John 3:8)</strong></a> The one who practices sin originates with the Devil, because the Devil has been sinning from the beginning.* For this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, to break up* the works of the Devil.</p><p></p><p>Or “from when he began.”</p><p>Or “destroy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(1 John 3:11, 12)</strong></a> For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>not like Cain, who originated with the wicked one and slaughtered his brother. And for what reason did he slaughter him? Because his own works were wicked, but those of his brother were righteous.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 14 par. 8 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p20"><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"><strong>109:30, 31;</strong></a><span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77"> <strong>110:5</strong></a><strong>. </strong>The sword-wielding right hand of a soldier normally lacks the protection of the shield, which was held on the left. Metaphorically, Jehovah is “at the right hand” of his servants, to fight for them. Thus he gives them protection and help<wbr />—a fine reason for us to “laud [him] very much”!</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 109:30, 31)</strong> My mouth will fervently praise Jehovah; I will praise him in front of many people. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>For he will stand at the right hand of the poor To save him from those who condemn him.*</p><p></p><p>Or “his soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 110:5)</strong> Jehovah will be at your right hand; He will crush kings on the day of his anger.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***ll p. 6 Who Is the True God?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Part 2</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>Who Is the True God?</strong></p>
<p class="p3">There is only one true God, and his name is Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Psalm 83:18</a>) He is a Spirit; we cannot see him. He loves us and wants us to love him in return. He also wants us to love other people. (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Matthew 22:35-40</a>) He is the Supreme One, the Creator of all things.</p>
<p class="p4">The first of God’s creations was a mighty spirit person who later came to be known as Jesus Christ. Jehovah also created the angels.</p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Jehovah created everything in heaven . . . and on earth. </strong><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"><strong>Revelation 4:11</strong></a></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(Ps. 83:18)</strong></a> May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Matt. 22:35-40)</strong></a> And one of them, versed in the Law, tested him by asking: <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He said to him: “‘You must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind.’ <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>This is the greatest and first commandment. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>On these two commandments the whole Law hangs, and the Prophets.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong></a> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***ll pp. 6-7 Who Is the True God?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Jehovah created everything in heaven . . . and on earth. </strong><span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81"><strong>Revelation 4:11</strong></a></p>
<p class="p6">Jehovah God created the stars as well as the earth and all that is on it.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Genesis 1:1</a>.</p>
<p class="p7">He formed Adam, the first man, from the dust of the ground.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">Genesis 2:7</a>.</p>
<p class="p8">Why should we honor Jehovah?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">Isaiah 42:5</a>.</p>
<p class="p9">What are some of God’s qualities?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Exodus 34:6</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong></a> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Gen. 1:1)</strong></a> In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <strong>(Gen. 2:7)</strong></a> And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person.*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.” Hebrew, <em>neʹphesh, </em>which literally means “a breathing creature.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <strong>(Isa. 42:5)</strong></a> This is what the true God, Jehovah, says, The Creator of the heavens and the Grand One who stretched them out, The One who spread out the earth and its produce, The One who gives breath to the people on it And spirit to those who walk on it:</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <strong>(Ex. 34:6)</strong></a> Jehovah was passing before him and declaring: “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate,* slow to anger and abundant in loyal love* and truth,*</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p><p>Or “faithfulness.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***bh pp. 178-179 Baptism and Your Relationship With God***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>MAKING A PERSONAL DEDICATION</strong></h2>
<p class="qu">14. What important step must you take before getting baptized?</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>There is another important step to take before getting baptized. You must <em>dedicate </em>yourself to Jehovah God.</p>
<p class="qu">15, 16. What does it mean to dedicate yourself to God, and what moves a person to do this?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When you dedicate yourself to Jehovah God in earnest prayer, you promise to give him your exclusive devotion forever. (<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Deuteronomy 6:15</a>) Why, though, would someone want to do that? Well, suppose a man has begun to court a woman. The more he learns about her and sees that she has fine qualities, the more he finds himself drawn to her. In time, it is natural that he would ask her to marry him. True, getting married will mean taking on additional responsibilities. But love will move him to take that important step.</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When you come to know and love Jehovah, you are moved to serve him without holding anything back or setting any limits in worshipping him. Anyone who wants to follow God’s Son, Jesus Christ, has to “disown himself.” (<span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">Mark 8:34</a>) We disown ourselves by making sure that personal desires and goals do not stand in the way of our complete obedience to God. Before you can get baptized, then, doing Jehovah God’s will must be your main purpose in life.<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"><strong>1 Peter 4:2</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 6:15)</strong> for Jehovah your God who is in your midst is a God who requires exclusive devotion. Otherwise, the anger of Jehovah your God will blaze against you and he will annihilate you from the face of the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Mark 8:34)</strong> He now called the crowd to him with his disciples and said to them: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake* and keep following me.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 4:2)</strong> so that he may live the remainder of his time in the flesh, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***sn song 94 Content With God’s Good Gifts***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 94</p>
<h1><strong>Content With God’s Good Gifts</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89">James 1:17</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. All perfect presents, each good gift,</p>
<p class="p5">The things we’re fondest of,</p>
<p class="p6">The truly worthy things in life,</p>
<p class="p7">Come down from God above.</p>
<p class="p8">With him there is no wavering,</p>
<p class="p9">No change, however slight.</p>
<p class="p10">Jehovah is our Grand Provider,</p>
<p class="p11">The Source of life and light.</p>
<p class="p12">2. We have no cause for anxious care</p>
<p class="p13">Concerning daily needs;</p>
<p class="p14">We know the loving care by him</p>
<p class="p15">Who birds of heaven feeds.</p>
<p class="p16">We give no place to worthless things,</p>
<p class="p17">No years to hurtful strife.</p>
<p class="p18">But satisfied with God’s provisions,</p>
<p class="p19">We lead a simple life.</p>
<p class="p20">3. The lofty things in human eyes,</p>
<p class="p21">To God are merely vain.</p>
<p class="p22">Let’s use the days we’re granted now</p>
<p class="p23">For things of lasting gain.</p>
<p class="p24">The riches that we store with God</p>
<p class="p25">Are safe, though we may die.</p>
<p class="p26">We prize the gift of true contentment</p>
<p class="p27">And keep a simple eye.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90">Jer. 45:5;</a><span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91"> Matt. 6:25-34;</a><span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92"> 1 Tim. 6:8;</a><span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93"> Heb. 13:5</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(Jas. 1:17)</strong></a> Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, coming down from the Father of the celestial lights, who does not vary or change like the shifting shadows.*</p><p></p><p>Or “with whom there is not a variation of the turning of the shadow.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <strong>(Jer. 45:5)</strong></a> But you are seeking* great things for yourself. Stop seeking such things.”’ “‘For I am about to bring a calamity on all flesh,’* declares Jehovah, ‘and wherever you may go, I will grant you your life* as a spoil.’”*</p><p></p><p>Or “expecting.”</p><p>Or “people.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “will let you escape with your life.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:25-34)</strong></a> “On this account I say to you: Stop being anxious about your lives* as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not life* mean more than food and the body than clothing? <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Observe intently the birds of heaven; they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit* to his life span? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Also, why are you anxious about clothing? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not toil, nor do they spin; <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation of the field that is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith? <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>So never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to wear?’ <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. Your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>“Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>So never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Each day has enough of its own troubles.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “the soul.”</p><p>See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 6:8)</strong></a> So, having food* and clothing,* we will be content with these things.</p><p></p><p>Or “sustenance.”</p><p>Or “shelter.” Lit., “covering.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <strong>(Heb. 13:5)</strong></a> Let your way of life be free of the love of money, while you are content with the present things. For he has said: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***ia pp. 191-194 He Was Loyal in the Face of Tests***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>14. </strong>Jesus bestowed on Peter what important privileges?</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>This Christ was the one called in ancient prophecy a stone that the builders would reject. (<span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94">Ps. 118:22;</a><span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95"> Luke 20:17</a>) With such prophecies in mind, Jesus revealed that Jehovah would establish a congregation on the very stone, or rock-mass, that Peter had just identified. Then he bestowed on Peter some very important privileges in that congregation. He did not give Peter primacy over the other apostles, as some have assumed, but he gave him responsibilities. He gave Peter “the keys of the kingdom.” (<span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96">Matt. 16:19</a>) It would be Peter’s privilege to open the hope of entering God’s Kingdom to three different fields of mankind<wbr />—first to the Jews, then to the Samaritans, and finally to the Gentiles, or non-Jews.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>15. </strong>What led Peter to rebuke Jesus, and in what words?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>However, Jesus later stated that those given much would have more to answer for, and the truth of those words is borne out in Peter’s case. (<span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97">Luke 12:48</a>) Jesus continued to reveal vital truths about the Messiah, including the certainty of his own impending suffering and death at Jerusalem. Peter was disturbed to hear such things. He took Jesus aside and rebuked him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not have this destiny at all.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">Matt. 16:21, 22</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>16. </strong>How did Jesus correct Peter, and what practical counsel may all of us find in Jesus’ words?</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Peter surely meant well, so Jesus’ reply must have come as a surprise. He turned his back on Peter, looked at the rest of the disciples<wbr />—who had likely been thinking something similar—<wbr />and said: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.” (<span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99">Matt. 16:23;</a><span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100"> Mark 8:32, 33</a>) Jesus’ words contain practical counsel for us all. It is only too easy to allow human thinking to take priority over godly thinking. If we do so, even when we mean to help, we may inadvertently become proponents of Satan’s purpose rather than God’s. How, though, did Peter respond?</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>17. </strong>What did Jesus mean by telling Peter to “get behind” him?</p>
<p class="p21"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Peter must have realized that Jesus was not calling him Satan the Devil in any literal sense. After all, Jesus did not speak to Peter as he had to Satan. To Satan, Jesus had said: “Go away”; to Peter, he said: “Get behind me.” (<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Matt. 4:10</a>) Jesus did not cast off this apostle in whom he saw a great deal of good, but he simply corrected Peter’s wrong thinking in this matter. It is not hard to see that Peter needed to stop getting in front of his Master as a stumbling block and needed to get back behind him as a supportive follower.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p60">Only if we humbly accept discipline and learn from it can we continue to grow closer to Jesus Christ and his Father, Jehovah God</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"><strong>18. </strong>How did Peter demonstrate loyalty, and how can we imitate him?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Did Peter argue, get angry, or sulk? No; he humbly accepted correction. He thus demonstrated loyalty again. All those who follow Christ will need correction at times. Only if we humbly accept discipline and learn from it can we continue to grow closer to Jesus Christ and his Father, Jehovah God.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102"><strong><em>Proverbs 4:13</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<h2><strong>Loyalty Rewarded</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>19. </strong>Jesus made what startling statement, and what may Peter have wondered?</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jesus soon made another startling statement: “Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here that will not taste death at all until first they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.” (<span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103">Matt. 16:28</a>) No doubt those words filled Peter with curiosity. What could Jesus possibly mean? Perhaps Peter wondered if the strong correction he had just received meant that no such special privileges would be coming his way.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20, 21. </strong>(a) Describe the vision that Peter witnessed. (b) How did the conversation among the figures in the vision help to correct Peter?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>About a week later, however, Jesus took James, John, and Peter up into “a lofty mountain”<wbr />—perhaps Mount Hermon, which was not many miles (25 km) distant. It was likely nighttime, since the three men were combating sleepiness. But as Jesus prayed, something happened that drove away any drowsiness.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104">Matt. 17:1;</a><span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105"> Luke 9:28, 29,</a><span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106"> 32</a>.</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Jesus began to change before their eyes. His face started to shine, to glow, until it became as brilliant as the sun. His clothes too were glistening white. Then two figures appeared with Jesus, one representing Moses and the other, Elijah. They conversed with him about “his departure that he was destined to fulfill at Jerusalem”<wbr />—evidently his death and resurrection. How clear it was that Peter had been wrong to deny that Jesus had such a painful experience ahead of him!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107">Luke 9:30, 31</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>22, 23. </strong>(a) How did Peter show an enthusiastic and warm spirit? (b) Peter, James, and John received what other reward that night?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Peter felt compelled to participate somehow in this extraordinary vision<wbr />—and perhaps to prolong it. It looked as if Moses and Elijah were parting from Jesus. So Peter spoke up: “Instructor, it is fine for us to be here, so let us erect three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.” Of course, these visionary representations of two of Jehovah’s long-dead servants did not need tents. Peter really did not know what he was saying. Are you not drawn to the man, though, for his enthusiastic and warm spirit?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108">Luke 9:33</a>.</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Peter, James, and John received another reward that night. A cloud formed and loomed over them on the mountain. From it came a voice<wbr />—the voice of Jehovah God! He said: “This is my Son, the one that has been chosen. Listen to him.” Then the vision was over, and they were alone with Jesus on the mountain.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109">Luke 9:34-36</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>24. </strong>(a) How did the transfiguration vision benefit Peter? (b) How may we today benefit from the transfiguration vision?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>What a gift that transfiguration vision was for Peter<wbr />—and for us! Decades later he wrote of the privilege he had that night of actually seeing a preview of Jesus as a glorious heavenly King and of being one of the “eyewitnesses of his magnificence.” That vision confirmed many prophecies of God’s Word and strengthened Peter’s faith for the trials he had yet to face. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110"><strong><em>2 Peter 1:16-19</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>)</strong> It can do the same for us if, like Peter, we remain loyal to the Master whom Jehovah has appointed over us, learning from him, accepting his discipline and correction, and humbly following him day by day.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 118:22)</strong> The stone that the builders rejected Has become the chief cornerstone.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the head of the corner.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Luke 20:17)</strong> But he looked straight at them and said: “What, then, does this mean where it is written: ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone’?*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the head of the corner.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 16:19)</strong> I will give you the keys of the Kingdom of the heavens, and whatever you may bind on earth will already be bound in the heavens, and whatever you may loosen on earth will already be loosened in the heavens.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Luke 12:48)</strong> But the one who did not understand and yet did things deserving of strokes will be beaten with few. Indeed, everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him, and the one who was put in charge of much will have more than usual demanded of him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 16:21, 22)</strong> From that time forward, Jesus began explaining to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes and be killed, and on the third day be raised up. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>At this Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord; you will not have this happen to you at all.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 16:23)</strong> But turning his back, he said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Mark 8:32, 33)</strong> Indeed, he was making that statement openly. But Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>At this he turned, looked at his disciples, and rebuked Peter, saying: “Get behind me, Satan! because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 4:10)</strong> Then Jesus said to him: “Go away, Satan! For it is written: ‘It is Jehovah* your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 4:13)</strong> Hold on to discipline; do not let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 16:28)</strong> Truly I say to you that there are some of those standing here who will not taste death at all until first they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 17:1)</strong> Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and his brother John along and led them up into a lofty mountain by themselves.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Luke 9:28, 29)</strong> In fact, about eight days after saying these words, he took Peter, John, and James along and climbed up the mountain to pray. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>And as he was praying, the appearance of his face changed and his clothing became glitteringly white.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Luke 9:32)</strong> Now Peter and those with him were weighed down with sleep, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Luke 9:30, 31)</strong> And look! two men were conversing with him; they were Moses and E·liʹjah. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>These appeared with glory and began talking about his departure, which he was about to fulfill at Jerusalem.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(Luke 9:33)</strong> And as these were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus: “Instructor, it is fine for us to be here. So let us erect three tents, one for you, one for Moses, and one for E·liʹjah.” He did not realize what he was saying.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 23</span></a> <strong>(Luke 9:34-36)</strong> But as he was saying these things, a cloud formed and began to overshadow them. As they entered into the cloud, they became afraid. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Then a voice came out of the cloud, saying: “This is my Son, the one who has been chosen. Listen to him.” <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>As the voice spoke, Jesus was found alone. But they kept quiet and did not report to anyone in those days any of the things they saw.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 24</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 1:16-19)</strong> No, it was not by following artfully contrived false stories that we made known to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, but rather, we were eyewitnesses of his magnificence. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For he received from God the Father honor and glory when words such as these* were conveyed to him by the magnificent glory: “This is my Son, my beloved, whom I myself have approved.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Yes, these words we heard coming from heaven while we were with him in the holy mountain. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So we have the prophetic word made more sure, and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place (until day dawns and a daystar rises) in your hearts.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “such a voice.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource17">^ <span id="pcitation17"></span><strong>***ia chap. 22 He Was Loyal in the Face of Tests***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>TO THINK ABOUT . . .</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p34">  How did Peter’s faith move him to be loyal when many abandoned Jesus?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p35">  How did Peter’s faith and loyalty help him to accept correction?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p36">  How did the transfiguration vision strengthen Peter’s faith?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p37">  In what further ways would you like to imitate Peter’s faith?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016289.xhtml#pcitationsource18">^ <span id="pcitation18"></span><strong>***snnw song 149 Grateful for the Ransom***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 149</p>
<h1><strong>Grateful for the Ransom</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111">Luke 22:20</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             Today, Jehovah God,</p>
<p class="p8">we stand before your throne,</p>
<p class="p9">For you showed the greatest love</p>
<p class="p10">that could ever be shown.</p>
<p class="p11">You gave the gift of your dear Son,</p>
<p class="p12">that we might live.</p>
<p class="p13">No greater sacrifice than this</p>
<p class="p14">could you ever give.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p15">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p16">He gave his life to set us free.</p>
<p class="p17">His precious blood provides the key.</p>
<p class="p18">With all our hearts,</p>
<p class="p19">we’ll go on thanking you eternally.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p20">             It was a willing sacrifice</p>
<p class="p21">that Jesus made.</p>
<p class="p22">Out of love, his perfect life</p>
<p class="p23">was the price that he paid.</p>
<p class="p24">We had no hope until he came</p>
<p class="p25">to save mankind.</p>
<p class="p26">But now our hope is finding life,</p>
<p class="p27">leaving death behind.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p28">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p29">He gave his life to set us free.</p>
<p class="p30">His precious blood provides the key.</p>
<p class="p31">With all our hearts,</p>
<p class="p32">we’ll go on thanking you eternally.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p33">(See also <span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112">Heb. 9:13, 14;</a><span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113"> 1 Pet. 1:18, 19</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <strong>(Luke 22:20)</strong></a> Also, he did the same with the cup after they had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood, which is to be poured out in your behalf.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <strong>(Heb. 9:13, 14)</strong></a> For if the blood of goats and of bulls and the ashes of a heifer* sprinkled on those who have been defiled sanctifies for the cleansing of the flesh, <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>how much more will the blood of the Christ, who through an everlasting spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works so that we may render sacred service to the living God?</p><p></p><p>Or “young cow.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 1:18, 19)</strong></a> For you know that it was not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, that you were set free* from your futile way of life handed down to you by your forefathers.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But it was with precious blood, like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb, that of Christ.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “you were ransomed; you were redeemed.”</p><p>Or “by tradition.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
