<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 Jehovah Remembers That We Are Dust</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016288.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 102:0-105:45)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.” </p><p>Of David. <strong>103 </strong>Let me* praise Jehovah; Let everything within me praise his holy name.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let me* praise Jehovah; May I never forget all that he has done.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He forgives all your errors And heals all your ailments;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He reclaims your life from the pit* And crowns you with his loyal love and mercy.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He satisfies you with good things all your life, So that your youth is renewed like that of an eagle.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah acts with righteousness and justice For all who are oppressed.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He made known his ways to Moses, His deeds to the sons of Israel.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So great is his loyal love toward those who fear him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, So far off from us he has put our transgressions. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>As for mortal man, his days are like those of grass; He blooms like a blossom of the field. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But when a wind blows, it is no more, As though it was never there.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But the loyal love of Jehovah is for all eternity* Toward those who fear him, And his righteousness toward their children’s children, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Toward those who keep his covenant And those who are careful to observe his orders. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens; And his kingship rules over everything. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah, all you his angels, mighty in power, Who carry out his word, obeying his voice.* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah, all his armies, His ministers who do his will. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah, all his works, In all the places where he rules.* Let my whole being* praise Jehovah. </p><p><strong>104 </strong>Let me* praise Jehovah. O Jehovah my God, you are very great. With majesty* and splendor you are clothed.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You are wrapped in light as with a garment; You stretch out the heavens like a tent cloth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He lays beams of his upper rooms in the waters above,* Making the clouds his chariot, Moving on the wings of the wind.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He makes his angels spirits, His ministers a consuming fire.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He has established the earth on its foundations; It will not be moved from its place* forever and ever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You covered it with deep waters as with a garment. The waters stood above the mountains.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>At your rebuke they fled; At the sound of your thunder they ran away in panic  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>—Mountains ascended and valleys descended— To the place you established for them.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You set a boundary that they should not pass, That they should never again cover the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He sends springs into the valleys;* Between the mountains they flow. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They provide water for all the wild beasts of the field; The wild donkeys quench their thirst. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Above them roost the birds of the sky; They sing among the thick foliage. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He is watering the mountains from his upper rooms. With the fruitage of your works the earth is satisfied. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He is making grass grow for the cattle And vegetation for mankind’s use, To grow food from the land <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And wine that makes man’s heart rejoice, Oil that makes the face shine, And bread that sustains the heart of mortal man. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, The cedars of Lebʹa·non that he planted, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Where the birds make nests. The home of the stork is in the juniper trees. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The high mountains are for the mountain goats; The crags are a refuge for the rock badgers. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He has made the moon to mark the appointed times; The sun well knows when to set. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>You bring darkness, and night falls, When all the wild animals of the forest roam about. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The young lions* roar for their prey And seek their food from God. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the sun rises, They withdraw and lie down in their dens. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Man goes to his work, And he labors until evening. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>How many your works are, O Jehovah! You have made all of them in wisdom. The earth is full of what you have made. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There is the sea, so great and wide, Teeming with countless living things, both small and great. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>There the ships travel, And Le·viʹa·than,* which you formed to play in it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>All of them wait for you To give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>What you give them, they gather. When you open your hand, they are satisfied with good things. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>When you hide your face, they are disturbed. If you take away their spirit, they die and return to the dust. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>If you send out your spirit, they are created, And you renew the surface of the ground. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The glory of Jehovah will last forever. Jehovah will rejoice in his works. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>He looks at the earth, and it trembles; He touches the mountains, and they smoke. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life; I will sing praises* to my God as long as I live. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Let my thoughts be pleasing to him.* I will rejoice in Jehovah. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The sinners will vanish from the earth, And the wicked will no longer exist. Let me* praise Jehovah. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>105 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name, Make his deeds known among the peoples!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing to him, sing praises* to him, Ponder over* all his wonderful works.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Boast about his holy name. Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Search for Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face* constantly.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Remember the wonderful works he has performed, His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You offspring* of Abraham his servant, You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are throughout the earth.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He remembers his covenant forever, The promise he made,* to a thousand generations,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The covenant he made with Abraham, And the oath he swore to Isaac, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Which he established as a decree to Jacob And as a lasting covenant to Israel, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Saying, “I will give you the land of Caʹnaan As your allotted inheritance.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>This was when they were few in number, Yes, very few, and they were foreigners in the land. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They walked about from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He did not allow any man to oppress them, But on their account he reproved kings, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Saying, “Do not touch my anointed ones, And to my prophets do nothing bad.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He called down a famine on the land; He cut off their supply of bread.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He sent ahead of them a man Who was sold to be a slave, Joseph. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>With fetters they bound* his feet, His neck was put in irons;* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Until the time that his word proved true, The saying of Jehovah is what refined him. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The king sent to release him, The ruler of the peoples set him free. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He made him master of his household, Ruler over all his property, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>To have authority over* his princes as he pleased* And to teach his elders wisdom. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then Israel came into Egypt, And Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>God made his people very fruitful; He made them mightier than their adversaries, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whose hearts he let change to hate his people, To plot against his servants. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He sent his servant Moses, And Aaron, whom he had chosen. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>They performed his signs among them, His miracles in the land of Ham. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He sent darkness and the land became dark; They did not rebel against his words. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He changed their waters into blood And killed their fish. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Their land swarmed with frogs, Even in the royal chambers. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>He ordered the gadflies to invade And gnats in all their territories. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>He turned their rain to hail And sent lightning* on their land. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He struck their vines and their fig trees And shattered the trees of their territory. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>He said that the locusts should invade, Young locusts without number. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>They devoured all the vegetation in the land, And they devoured the produce of the ground. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Then he struck down every firstborn in their land, The beginning of their procreative power. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He brought his people out with silver and gold; And no one among his tribes stumbled. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Egypt rejoiced when they left, For the dread of Israel* had fallen on them. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>He spread a cloud to screen them off And fire to give light by night. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>They asked, and he brought quail; He kept satisfying them with bread from heaven. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>He opened a rock, and waters flowed out; These flowed through the desert like a river. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>For he remembered the holy promise he had made to Abraham his servant. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>So he brought out his people with exultation, His chosen ones with a joyful cry. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>He gave them the lands of nations; They inherited what other peoples had worked hard to produce, <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>So that they would keep his decrees And observe his laws. Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “grave.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p><p>Lit., “And its place no longer knows it.”</p><p>Or “from eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Lit., “hearing the voice (sound) of his word.”</p><p>Or “the places of his sovereignty.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “dignity.”</p><p>Lit., “in the waters.”</p><p>Or “will not totter.”</p><p>Or “wadis.”</p><p>Or “maned young lions.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Let my meditation about him be pleasurable.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Speak about.”</p><p>Or “presence.”</p><p>Or “descendants.” Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “The word he commanded.”</p><p>Lit., “broke every bread rod.” Possibly referring to rods used for storing bread.</p><p>Lit., “afflicted.”</p><p>Or “His soul came into iron.”</p><p>Lit., “To bind.”</p><p>Or “agreeably to his soul.”</p><p>Or “flames of fire.”</p><p>Lit., “them.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
