<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 Sample Presentations</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016281.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***g16 pp. 10-11 How to Deal With Change***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="featureTtl"><strong>HELP FOR THE FAMILY | YOUNG PEOPLE</strong></p>
<h1><strong>How to Deal With Change</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>THE CHALLENGE</strong></h2>
<ul class="noMarker"><li><p class="p4">  Your dad’s job requires that your family relocate.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Your best friend is moving far away.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p6">  Your older sibling is leaving home to get married.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p7">How well would <em>you </em>adapt to such changes?</p>
<p class="p8">A tree that can bend with the wind is more likely to survive a storm. Like that tree, you can learn to “bend” with changes over which you have little or no control. Before discussing how you can do that, though, consider a few things you should know about change.</p>
<h2><strong>WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>Change is inevitable. </strong>The Bible states a fundamental truth about humans: “Unexpected events overtake them all.” (<span id="citationsource4"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation4">Ecclesiastes 9:11</a>) Sooner or later, you will be confronted with the reality of those words. Of course, not all unexpected events are bad. And some changes that at first <em>seem </em>to be bad might turn out to be advantageous. Nevertheless, most people thrive on routine, while change<wbr />—whether good or bad—<wbr />rattles their comfort zone.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>Change can be particularly stressful for adolescents. </strong>Why? “You’re already going through <em>internal </em>changes,” explains a young man named Alex.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> <em>“External </em>changes just add to the stress.”</p>
<p class="p12">Here is another reason: When adults face a change, they can refer to their personal ‘book of experience’ to see how they dealt with similar situations in the past. But young people have less history on which to draw.</p>
<p class="p13"><strong>You can learn to adapt. </strong>Resilience is the ability to recover from misfortune or adjust to change. A resilient person can not only <em>endure </em>a new circumstance but also look at a seeming obstacle and see an opportunity in it. Resilient teens are less likely to turn to drugs or alcohol when they feel overwhelmed.</p>
<h2><strong>WHAT YOU CAN DO</strong></h2>
<p class="p15"><strong>Accept reality. </strong>No doubt you would like to have total control of your life, but that is simply not possible. Friends will move away or marry; siblings will grow up and leave home; circumstances may force your family to move, leaving behind friends and all that is familiar. It is better to accept reality than to let negative thoughts overwhelm you.<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource5"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation5"><em>Ecclesiastes 7:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Look ahead. </strong>Focusing on the past is like driving on a highway with your eyes fixed on the rearview mirror. An occasional glance is beneficial, but you really need to concentrate on the road ahead. The same is true when you are confronted with change. Try to keep your eyes fixed on the future. (<span id="citationsource6"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation6">Proverbs 4:25</a>) For example, what goal could you set for the next month, or six months?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>Focus on the positive. </strong>“Resilience is about attitude,” says a young woman named Laura. “Find positive aspects of the circumstance you are in.” Can you list at least one advantage that your new circumstance offers?<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource7"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation7"><em>Ecclesiastes 6:9</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p18">A young woman named Victoria recalls that in her teen years, all her close friends moved away. “I felt so lonely, and I wished that everything could have stayed the way it was,” she says. “But looking back, that’s when I really started to grow. I came to realize that growth <em>requires </em>change. That’s also when I started seeing possibilities for new friendships that were all around me.”<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8"><em>Proverbs 27:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p23">Focusing on the past is like driving on a highway with your eyes fixed on the rearview mirror</p>
</div>
<p class="p19"><strong>Do things for others. </strong>The Bible says: “Look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.” (<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Philippians 2:4</a>) A good antidote to your own challenge is helping others with theirs. Anna, 17, says: “As I grew older, I came to realize that when I could help someone else who might be going through a similar situation<wbr />—or a worse one—<wbr />it was rewarding!”</p>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> Some names in this article have been changed.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>KEY SCRIPTURES</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p26">“Do not say, ‘Why were the former days better than these?’”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Ecclesiastes 7:10</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p27">“Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Ecclesiastes 6:9</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p28">“Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Proverbs 27:10</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxContent"><blockquote><p class="p30"><strong>JUAN</strong></p>
<p class="p31">“Young people can develop resilience by analyzing the situation they are coping with and realizing that change is a part of life. The quicker a person accepts that reality, the easier it will be to move on with life. Things do get better.”</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote><p class="p32"><strong>CARISSA</strong></p>
<p class="p33">“Once a difficulty has passed, I try not to relive it over and over in my mind. I just move on to the next challenge in life. Part of being resilient, I believe, is looking ahead rather than looking behind.”</p>
</blockquote>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation4"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource4">^ <strong>(Eccl. 9:11)</strong></a> I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events* overtake them all.</p><p></p><p>Or “unforeseen occurrence.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation5"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource5">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:10)</strong></a> Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation6"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource6">^ <strong>(Prov. 4:25)</strong></a> Your eyes should look straight ahead, Yes, fix your gaze* straight ahead of you.</p><p></p><p>Or “beaming eyes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation7"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Eccl. 6:9)</strong></a> Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.* This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.</p><p></p><p>Or “than the walking about of the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:10)</strong></a> Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Phil. 2:4)</strong></a> as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:10)</strong></a> Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Eccl. 6:9)</strong></a> Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.* This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.</p><p></p><p>Or “than the walking about of the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:10)</strong></a> Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016281.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***ll pp. 6-7 Who Is the True God?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Part 2</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>Who Is the True God?</strong></p>
<p class="p3">There is only one true God, and his name is Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Psalm 83:18</a>) He is a Spirit; we cannot see him. He loves us and wants us to love him in return. He also wants us to love other people. (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Matthew 22:35-40</a>) He is the Supreme One, the Creator of all things.</p>
<p class="p4">The first of God’s creations was a mighty spirit person who later came to be known as Jesus Christ. Jehovah also created the angels.</p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Jehovah created everything in heaven . . . and on earth. </strong><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"><strong>Revelation 4:11</strong></a></p>
<p class="p6">Jehovah God created the stars as well as the earth and all that is on it.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Genesis 1:1</a>.</p>
<p class="p7">He formed Adam, the first man, from the dust of the ground.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Genesis 2:7</a>.</p>
<p class="p8">Why should we honor Jehovah?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Isaiah 42:5</a>.</p>
<p class="p9">What are some of God’s qualities?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Exodus 34:6</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Ps. 83:18)</strong></a> May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Matt. 22:35-40)</strong></a> And one of them, versed in the Law, tested him by asking: <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He said to him: “‘You must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind.’ <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>This is the greatest and first commandment. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>The second, like it, is this: ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>On these two commandments the whole Law hangs, and the Prophets.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong></a> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Gen. 1:1)</strong></a> In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Gen. 2:7)</strong></a> And Jehovah God went on to form the man out of dust from the ground and to blow into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living person.*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.” Hebrew, <em>neʹphesh, </em>which literally means “a breathing creature.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Isa. 42:5)</strong></a> This is what the true God, Jehovah, says, The Creator of the heavens and the Grand One who stretched them out, The One who spread out the earth and its produce, The One who gives breath to the people on it And spirit to those who walk on it:</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Ex. 34:6)</strong></a> Jehovah was passing before him and declaring: “Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate,* slow to anger and abundant in loyal love* and truth,*</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p><p>Or “faithfulness.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
