<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 August 15-21</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016287.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 102:0-105:45)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.” </p><p>Of David. <strong>103 </strong>Let me* praise Jehovah; Let everything within me praise his holy name.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let me* praise Jehovah; May I never forget all that he has done.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He forgives all your errors And heals all your ailments;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He reclaims your life from the pit* And crowns you with his loyal love and mercy.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He satisfies you with good things all your life, So that your youth is renewed like that of an eagle.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah acts with righteousness and justice For all who are oppressed.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He made known his ways to Moses, His deeds to the sons of Israel.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So great is his loyal love toward those who fear him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, So far off from us he has put our transgressions. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>As for mortal man, his days are like those of grass; He blooms like a blossom of the field. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But when a wind blows, it is no more, As though it was never there.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But the loyal love of Jehovah is for all eternity* Toward those who fear him, And his righteousness toward their children’s children, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Toward those who keep his covenant And those who are careful to observe his orders. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens; And his kingship rules over everything. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah, all you his angels, mighty in power, Who carry out his word, obeying his voice.* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah, all his armies, His ministers who do his will. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Praise Jehovah, all his works, In all the places where he rules.* Let my whole being* praise Jehovah. </p><p><strong>104 </strong>Let me* praise Jehovah. O Jehovah my God, you are very great. With majesty* and splendor you are clothed.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You are wrapped in light as with a garment; You stretch out the heavens like a tent cloth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He lays beams of his upper rooms in the waters above,* Making the clouds his chariot, Moving on the wings of the wind.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He makes his angels spirits, His ministers a consuming fire.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He has established the earth on its foundations; It will not be moved from its place* forever and ever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You covered it with deep waters as with a garment. The waters stood above the mountains.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>At your rebuke they fled; At the sound of your thunder they ran away in panic  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>—Mountains ascended and valleys descended— To the place you established for them.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You set a boundary that they should not pass, That they should never again cover the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He sends springs into the valleys;* Between the mountains they flow. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They provide water for all the wild beasts of the field; The wild donkeys quench their thirst. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Above them roost the birds of the sky; They sing among the thick foliage. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He is watering the mountains from his upper rooms. With the fruitage of your works the earth is satisfied. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He is making grass grow for the cattle And vegetation for mankind’s use, To grow food from the land <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And wine that makes man’s heart rejoice, Oil that makes the face shine, And bread that sustains the heart of mortal man. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The trees of Jehovah are satisfied, The cedars of Lebʹa·non that he planted, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Where the birds make nests. The home of the stork is in the juniper trees. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The high mountains are for the mountain goats; The crags are a refuge for the rock badgers. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>He has made the moon to mark the appointed times; The sun well knows when to set. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>You bring darkness, and night falls, When all the wild animals of the forest roam about. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The young lions* roar for their prey And seek their food from God. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the sun rises, They withdraw and lie down in their dens. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Man goes to his work, And he labors until evening. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>How many your works are, O Jehovah! You have made all of them in wisdom. The earth is full of what you have made. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>There is the sea, so great and wide, Teeming with countless living things, both small and great. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>There the ships travel, And Le·viʹa·than,* which you formed to play in it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>All of them wait for you To give them their food in its season. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>What you give them, they gather. When you open your hand, they are satisfied with good things. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>When you hide your face, they are disturbed. If you take away their spirit, they die and return to the dust. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>If you send out your spirit, they are created, And you renew the surface of the ground. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The glory of Jehovah will last forever. Jehovah will rejoice in his works. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>He looks at the earth, and it trembles; He touches the mountains, and they smoke. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life; I will sing praises* to my God as long as I live. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Let my thoughts be pleasing to him.* I will rejoice in Jehovah. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The sinners will vanish from the earth, And the wicked will no longer exist. Let me* praise Jehovah. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>105 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, call on his name, Make his deeds known among the peoples!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing to him, sing praises* to him, Ponder over* all his wonderful works.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Boast about his holy name. Let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Search for Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face* constantly.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Remember the wonderful works he has performed, His miracles and the judgments he has pronounced,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You offspring* of Abraham his servant, You sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are throughout the earth.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He remembers his covenant forever, The promise he made,* to a thousand generations,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The covenant he made with Abraham, And the oath he swore to Isaac, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Which he established as a decree to Jacob And as a lasting covenant to Israel, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Saying, “I will give you the land of Caʹnaan As your allotted inheritance.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>This was when they were few in number, Yes, very few, and they were foreigners in the land. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They walked about from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He did not allow any man to oppress them, But on their account he reproved kings, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Saying, “Do not touch my anointed ones, And to my prophets do nothing bad.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He called down a famine on the land; He cut off their supply of bread.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He sent ahead of them a man Who was sold to be a slave, Joseph. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>With fetters they bound* his feet, His neck was put in irons;* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Until the time that his word proved true, The saying of Jehovah is what refined him. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The king sent to release him, The ruler of the peoples set him free. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He made him master of his household, Ruler over all his property, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>To have authority over* his princes as he pleased* And to teach his elders wisdom. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then Israel came into Egypt, And Jacob lived as a foreigner in the land of Ham. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>God made his people very fruitful; He made them mightier than their adversaries, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whose hearts he let change to hate his people, To plot against his servants. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He sent his servant Moses, And Aaron, whom he had chosen. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>They performed his signs among them, His miracles in the land of Ham. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He sent darkness and the land became dark; They did not rebel against his words. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He changed their waters into blood And killed their fish. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Their land swarmed with frogs, Even in the royal chambers. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>He ordered the gadflies to invade And gnats in all their territories. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>He turned their rain to hail And sent lightning* on their land. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He struck their vines and their fig trees And shattered the trees of their territory. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>He said that the locusts should invade, Young locusts without number. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>They devoured all the vegetation in the land, And they devoured the produce of the ground. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Then he struck down every firstborn in their land, The beginning of their procreative power. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He brought his people out with silver and gold; And no one among his tribes stumbled. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Egypt rejoiced when they left, For the dread of Israel* had fallen on them. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>He spread a cloud to screen them off And fire to give light by night. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>They asked, and he brought quail; He kept satisfying them with bread from heaven. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>He opened a rock, and waters flowed out; These flowed through the desert like a river. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>For he remembered the holy promise he had made to Abraham his servant. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>So he brought out his people with exultation, His chosen ones with a joyful cry. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>He gave them the lands of nations; They inherited what other peoples had worked hard to produce, <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>So that they would keep his decrees And observe his laws. Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “grave.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p><p>Lit., “And its place no longer knows it.”</p><p>Or “from eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Lit., “hearing the voice (sound) of his word.”</p><p>Or “the places of his sovereignty.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “dignity.”</p><p>Lit., “in the waters.”</p><p>Or “will not totter.”</p><p>Or “wadis.”</p><p>Or “maned young lions.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Let my meditation about him be pleasurable.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Speak about.”</p><p>Or “presence.”</p><p>Or “descendants.” Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “The word he commanded.”</p><p>Lit., “broke every bread rod.” Possibly referring to rods used for storing bread.</p><p>Lit., “afflicted.”</p><p>Or “His soul came into iron.”</p><p>Lit., “To bind.”</p><p>Or “agreeably to his soul.”</p><p>Or “flames of fire.”</p><p>Lit., “them.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016287.xhtml#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 105:24-45)</strong></a> <span id="citation9"></span>God made his people very fruitful; He made them mightier than their adversaries, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whose hearts he let change to hate his people, To plot against his servants. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He sent his servant Moses, And Aaron, whom he had chosen. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>They performed his signs among them, His miracles in the land of Ham. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He sent darkness and the land became dark; They did not rebel against his words. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He changed their waters into blood And killed their fish. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Their land swarmed with frogs, Even in the royal chambers. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>He ordered the gadflies to invade And gnats in all their territories. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>He turned their rain to hail And sent lightning* on their land. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He struck their vines and their fig trees And shattered the trees of their territory. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>He said that the locusts should invade, Young locusts without number. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>They devoured all the vegetation in the land, And they devoured the produce of the ground. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Then he struck down every firstborn in their land, The beginning of their procreative power. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He brought his people out with silver and gold; And no one among his tribes stumbled. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Egypt rejoiced when they left, For the dread of Israel* had fallen on them. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>He spread a cloud to screen them off And fire to give light by night. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>They asked, and he brought quail; He kept satisfying them with bread from heaven. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>He opened a rock, and waters flowed out; These flowed through the desert like a river. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>For he remembered the holy promise he had made to Abraham his servant. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>So he brought out his people with exultation, His chosen ones with a joyful cry. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>He gave them the lands of nations; They inherited what other peoples had worked hard to produce, <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>So that they would keep his decrees And observe his laws. Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>Or “flames of fire.”</p><p>Lit., “them.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 80 The Quality of Goodness***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 80</p>
<h1><strong>The Quality of Goodness</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Psalm 119:66</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Knowing goodness from Jehovah</p>
<p class="p5">Is a joy through all our days.</p>
<p class="p6">As our Father in the heavens,</p>
<p class="p7">He is good in all his ways.</p>
<p class="p8">Showing favor, granting mercy,</p>
<p class="p9">Far beyond what we deserve;</p>
<p class="p10">He is worthy of our worship</p>
<p class="p11">And the One we gladly serve.</p>
<p class="p12">2. In his likeness he has made us</p>
<p class="p13">So that we might cultivate</p>
<p class="p14">All the virtues he possesses</p>
<p class="p15">And his goodness imitate.</p>
<p class="p16">May we grow in godly goodness,</p>
<p class="p17">In his virtues may we share.</p>
<p class="p18">Let us pray for holy spirit,</p>
<p class="p19">That its fruitage we might bear.</p>
<p class="p20">3. Those to whom we are related</p>
<p class="p21">In the faith<wbr />—our brotherhood<wbr />—</p>
<p class="p22">We will show them special favor,</p>
<p class="p23">But to all may we do good.</p>
<p class="p24">As we share the Kingdom good news</p>
<p class="p25">And our hope with all we meet,</p>
<p class="p26">May we always be impartial;</p>
<p class="p27">May our goodness be complete.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Ps. 103:10;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> Mark 10:18;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> Gal. 5:22;</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> Eph. 5:9</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:66)</strong></a> Teach me good sense and knowledge, For I have put my trust in your commandments.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 103:10)</strong></a> He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Mark 10:18)</strong></a> Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good except one, God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Gal. 5:22)</strong></a> On the other hand, the fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience,* kindness, goodness, faith,</p><p></p><p>Or “long-suffering.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Eph. 5:9)</strong></a> for the fruitage of the light consists of every sort of goodness and righteousness and truth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w13 6/15 p. 20 Appreciate Jehovah’s Loyalty and Forgiveness***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>14. </strong>How can we gain comfort from meditating on Jehovah’s forgiveness? Give an example.</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>We can gain comfort from meditating on Jehovah’s forgiveness. Consider an example. Many years ago, a sister whom we will call Elaine was disfellowshipped. Several years later, she was reinstated. “Although I told myself and others that I believed that I was forgiven by Jehovah,” admits Elaine, “I always felt that somehow he was at a distance or that others were closer to him and that he was more real to them.” However, Elaine drew comfort from reading and meditating on some of the word pictures that the Bible uses to describe Jehovah’s forgiveness. “I felt Jehovah’s love and tenderness toward me in a way that I had never realized before,” Elaine adds. She was especially moved by this thought: “When Jehovah forgives our sins, we need not feel that we bear the stain of such sins for the rest of our life.”<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> Elaine says: “I realized that I had not believed that Jehovah could fully forgive me, and I thought that I would carry this burden for the rest of my life. I know that it will take time, but I am starting to feel that I really can draw closer to Jehovah, and I feel that a weight has been lifted off me.” What a loving and forgiving God we serve!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Ps. 103:9</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:9)</strong> He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> See paragraph 10 in chapter 26 of the book <em>Draw Close to Jehovah</em><em>.</em></p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w12 7/15 p. 16 Serve the God of Freedom***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>17. </strong>Why should we not get downhearted about our imperfections, and what help does Jehovah provide?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>At times, of course, we all make mistakes. (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Eccl. 7:20</a>) When that occurs, do not feel worthless or overly discouraged. If you stumble, so to speak, get up and move forward<wbr />—even if that means asking the local elders for help. Their “prayer of faith,” wrote James, “will make the indisposed one well, and Jehovah will raise him up. Also, if he has committed sins, it will be forgiven him.” (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Jas. 5:15</a>) Yes, never forget that God is truly merciful and that <em>he drew you </em>into the congregation because he saw your potential. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19"><strong><em>Psalm 103:8, 9</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>So as long as you maintain a complete heart toward Jehovah, he will never give up on you.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">1 Chron. 28:9</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 7:20)</strong> For there is no righteous man on earth who always does good and never sins.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 5:15)</strong> And the prayer of faith will make the sick one* well, and Jehovah* will raise him up. Also, if he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “tired one.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:8, 9)</strong> Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(1 Chron. 28:9)</strong> “And you, Solʹo·mon my son, know the God of your father and serve him with a complete* heart and with a delightful* soul,* for Jehovah searches through all hearts, and he discerns every inclination of the thoughts. If you search for him, he will let himself be found by you, but if you leave him, he will reject you forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “completely devoted.”</p><p>Or “willing.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w15 4/15 p. 26 Always Trust in Jehovah!***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>8. </strong>What does Jehovah promise with regard to our personal limitations?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Another factor is that Jehovah is fully aware of our limitations. (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Ps. 103:14</a>) Therefore, he does not expect us to endure in our own strength but offers us his fatherly help. Of course, at times, we might feel that we cannot go on anymore. But Jehovah assures us that he will never allow his servants to suffer beyond their limit of endurance. Yes, he will “make the way out.” <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22"><strong>1 Corinthians 10:13</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Therefore, we have good reason to trust that Jehovah’s assessment of what we can bear is right.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:14)</strong> For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 10:13)</strong> No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w13 6/15 pp. 15-16 Appreciate Jehovah’s Generosity and Reasonableness***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Well, imagine that you are an Israelite and quite poor. As you arrive at the tabernacle with a little flour to offer as a sacrifice, you notice wealthier Israelites bringing livestock. You might feel embarrassed about your seemingly insignificant sacrifice of flour. Then you remember that in Jehovah’s eyes, your offering is significant. Why? For one thing, Jehovah required that the flour be of high quality. In effect, Jehovah was saying to poorer Israelites: ‘I realize that you cannot offer as much as others can, but I also know that what you are giving me is your best.’ Truly, Jehovah displays reasonableness by taking into account his servants’ limitations and their circumstances.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Ps. 103:14</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:14)</strong> For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w10 11/15 p. 25 Jehovah Is Our Sovereign Lord!***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 5. Why should we be moved to uphold Jehovah’s sovereignty?</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>As the Creator, Jehovah God is the Sovereign of the earth and the entire universe. (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24"><em>Revelation 4:11</em></a><em>.</em>) Jehovah is also our Judge, Statute-Giver, and King, for within himself he combines the judicial, legislative, and executive branches of universal government. (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Isa. 33:22</a>) Since we owe our very existence to God and are dependent on him, we should view him as our Sovereign Lord. We will be motivated to uphold his lofty position if we always bear in mind that “Jehovah himself has firmly established his throne in the very heavens; and over everything his own kingship has held domination.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Ps. 103:19;</a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> Acts 4:24</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 33:22)</strong> For Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver, Jehovah is our King; He is the One who will save us.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:19)</strong> Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens; And his kingship rules over everything.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Acts 4:24)</strong> On hearing this, they raised their voices with one accord to God and said: “Sovereign Lord, you are the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w07 12/1 p. 21 Jehovah’s Sovereignty and the Kingdom of God***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 1. Why is Jehovah the rightful Sovereign of the universe?</p>
<p class="p3">“JEHOVAH himself has firmly established his throne in the very heavens; and over everything his own kingship has held domination.” (<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Psalm 103:19</a>) With those words, the psalmist pointed to the fundamental concept of rulership. Jehovah God, being the Creator, is rightfully the Sovereign Ruler of the universe.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:19)</strong> Jehovah has firmly established his throne in the heavens; And his kingship rules over everything.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w14 3/15 p. 16 How to Maintain a Positive Viewpoint***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>THE “PRAYER OF THE OPPRESSED ONE”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>19. </strong>What situation did the writer of <span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Psalm 102</a> face?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The writer of <span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Psalm 102</a> was desperate. He was “oppressed,” suffering great physical or emotional distress, and he lacked the strength to deal with his problems. (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Ps. 102</a>, superscription) We find in his words an indication that he was absorbed in his pain, loneliness, and personal feelings. (<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Ps. 102:3, 4,</a><span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33"> 6,</a><span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34"> 11</a>) He believed that Jehovah wanted to cast him aside.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Ps. 102:10</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20. </strong>How can prayer help someone who battles negative thoughts?</p>
<p class="p30"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Yet, the psalmist could still use his life to praise Jehovah. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"><strong>Psalm 102:19-21</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>As we see from <span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Psalm 102</a>, even those who are in the faith can be in pain and be struggling to focus on anything else. The psalmist felt “like a solitary bird on a roof,” as if he had only his troubles for company. (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Ps. 102:7</a>) If you ever feel that way, pour out your heart to Jehovah as the psalmist did. The prayers of the oppressed one<wbr />—your prayers—<wbr />can help you as you battle negative thoughts. Jehovah promises that “he will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; he will not despise their prayer.” (<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Ps. 102:17</a>) Trust that promise.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>21. </strong>How might one who is battling negative feelings gain a more positive viewpoint?</p>
<p class="p31"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Psalm 102</a> also shows how you might gain a more positive viewpoint. The psalmist did so by shifting attention to his relationship with Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Ps. 102:12,</a><span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42"> 27</a>) He found comfort in knowing that Jehovah would always be there to sustain His people through trials. So if negative feelings temporarily keep you from doing as much as you want to in God’s service, pray about it. Ask God to hear your prayer not only so that you may experience some relief from your distress but also “so that the name of Jehovah will be declared.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Ps. 102:20, 21</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Ps. 102:0-28)</strong></a> A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:0-28)</strong> A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:0-28)</strong> A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:3, 4)</strong> For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:6)</strong> I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:11)</strong> My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass.</p><p></p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:10)</strong> Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:19-21)</strong> For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:0-28)</strong> A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:7)</strong> I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:17)</strong> He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:0-28)</strong> A prayer of the oppressed one when he is in despair* and pours out his concern before Jehovah. <strong>102 </strong>O Jehovah, hear my prayer; Let my cry for help reach you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do not hide your face from me in my time of distress. Incline your ear* to me; Do answer me quickly when I call.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my days are vanishing like smoke, And my bones are charred like a fireplace.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>My heart has been struck down like grass and has withered, For I forget to eat my food.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Because of my loud groaning, My bones cling to my flesh.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I resemble the pelican of the wilderness; I am like a little owl among the ruins.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I lie awake;* I am like a solitary bird on a roof.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All day long my enemies taunt me. Those who mock me* use my name as a curse.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For I eat ashes as my bread, And my drink is mingled with tears, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Because of your anger and your indignation, For you lifted me up only to cast me aside. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My days are like a fading shadow,* And I am withering like grass. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely you will rise up and show mercy on Zion, For it is time to show her your favor; The appointed time has come. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For your servants find pleasure in her stones And have affection even for her dust. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The nations will fear the name of Jehovah, And all the kings of the earth your glory. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will rebuild Zion; He will appear in his glory. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He will pay attention to the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is written for the future generation, So that a people yet to be brought forth* will praise Jah. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For he looks down from his holy height, From the heavens Jehovah views the earth, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When the peoples and kingdoms Gather together to serve Jehovah. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He prematurely robbed me of my strength; He cut short my days. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I said: “O my God, Do not do away with me in the middle of my life, You whose years span all generations. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Long ago you laid the foundations of the earth, And the heavens are the work of your hands. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They will perish, but you will remain; Just like a garment they will all wear out. Just like clothing you will replace them, and they will pass away. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But you are the same, and your years will never end. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The children of your servants will dwell securely, And their offspring will be firmly established before you.”</p><p></p><p>Or “he grows weak.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I am emaciated.”</p><p>Or “make a fool of me.”</p><p>Or “a lengthening shadow.”</p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Lit., “be created.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:12)</strong> But you remain forever, O Jehovah, And your fame* will endure for all generations.</p><p></p><p>Or “name.” Lit., “memorial.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:27)</strong> But you are the same, and your years will never end.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 102:20, 21)</strong> To hear the sighing of the prisoner, To release those sentenced to death, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So that the name of Jehovah will be declared in Zion And his praise in Jerusalem,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***w15 4/15 p. 25 Always Trust in Jehovah!***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>7. </strong>Why does Jehovah not always answer our prayers immediately?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Why does Jehovah not give us an immediate response to our every request? Recall that he likens our relationship with him to that of children with a father. (<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Ps. 103:13</a>) A child cannot rightly expect a parent to grant every request or to do so right away. Some of a child’s requests may be mere passing whims. Others must wait till the time is right. Still others may not be in the child’s best interests or in the best interests of others involved. Furthermore, to concede immediately to a child’s every request would change the relationship to one of master and slave, the child being the master. Similarly, Jehovah may in our best interests allow time to pass before his response to our prayers becomes evident. That is his prerogative as our wise Creator, loving Master, and heavenly Father. Fulfilling all our requests right away would distort the proper relationship between us and him.<wbr />—Compare <span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Isaiah 29:16;</a><span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46"> 45:9</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:13)</strong> As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 29:16)</strong> How you twist things!* Should the potter be regarded the same as the clay? Should what is made say about its maker: “He did not make me”? And does what is formed say about its former: “He shows no understanding”?</p><p></p><p>Or “How perverse of you!”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 45:9)</strong> Woe to the one who contends* with his Maker,* For he is just an earthenware fragment Among the other earthenware fragments lying on the ground! Should the clay say to the Potter:* “What are you making?” Or should your work say: “He has no hands”?*</p><p></p><p>Or “argues.”</p><p>Or “with the One who formed him.”</p><p>Or “the One who formed it.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Or should the clay say: ‘Your work has no handles’?”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***g16 pp. 10-11 How to Deal With Change***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="featureTtl"><strong>HELP FOR THE FAMILY | YOUNG PEOPLE</strong></p>
<h1><strong>How to Deal With Change</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>THE CHALLENGE</strong></h2>
<ul class="noMarker"><li><p class="p4">  Your dad’s job requires that your family relocate.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Your best friend is moving far away.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p6">  Your older sibling is leaving home to get married.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p7">How well would <em>you </em>adapt to such changes?</p>
<p class="p8">A tree that can bend with the wind is more likely to survive a storm. Like that tree, you can learn to “bend” with changes over which you have little or no control. Before discussing how you can do that, though, consider a few things you should know about change.</p>
<h2><strong>WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>Change is inevitable. </strong>The Bible states a fundamental truth about humans: “Unexpected events overtake them all.” (<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Ecclesiastes 9:11</a>) Sooner or later, you will be confronted with the reality of those words. Of course, not all unexpected events are bad. And some changes that at first <em>seem </em>to be bad might turn out to be advantageous. Nevertheless, most people thrive on routine, while change<wbr />—whether good or bad—<wbr />rattles their comfort zone.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>Change can be particularly stressful for adolescents. </strong>Why? “You’re already going through <em>internal </em>changes,” explains a young man named Alex.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> <em>“External </em>changes just add to the stress.”</p>
<p class="p12">Here is another reason: When adults face a change, they can refer to their personal ‘book of experience’ to see how they dealt with similar situations in the past. But young people have less history on which to draw.</p>
<p class="p13"><strong>You can learn to adapt. </strong>Resilience is the ability to recover from misfortune or adjust to change. A resilient person can not only <em>endure </em>a new circumstance but also look at a seeming obstacle and see an opportunity in it. Resilient teens are less likely to turn to drugs or alcohol when they feel overwhelmed.</p>
<h2><strong>WHAT YOU CAN DO</strong></h2>
<p class="p15"><strong>Accept reality. </strong>No doubt you would like to have total control of your life, but that is simply not possible. Friends will move away or marry; siblings will grow up and leave home; circumstances may force your family to move, leaving behind friends and all that is familiar. It is better to accept reality than to let negative thoughts overwhelm you.<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"><em>Ecclesiastes 7:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Look ahead. </strong>Focusing on the past is like driving on a highway with your eyes fixed on the rearview mirror. An occasional glance is beneficial, but you really need to concentrate on the road ahead. The same is true when you are confronted with change. Try to keep your eyes fixed on the future. (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Proverbs 4:25</a>) For example, what goal could you set for the next month, or six months?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>Focus on the positive. </strong>“Resilience is about attitude,” says a young woman named Laura. “Find positive aspects of the circumstance you are in.” Can you list at least one advantage that your new circumstance offers?<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"><em>Ecclesiastes 6:9</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p18">A young woman named Victoria recalls that in her teen years, all her close friends moved away. “I felt so lonely, and I wished that everything could have stayed the way it was,” she says. “But looking back, that’s when I really started to grow. I came to realize that growth <em>requires </em>change. That’s also when I started seeing possibilities for new friendships that were all around me.”<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51"><em>Proverbs 27:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p23">Focusing on the past is like driving on a highway with your eyes fixed on the rearview mirror</p>
</div>
<p class="p19"><strong>Do things for others. </strong>The Bible says: “Look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.” (<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Philippians 2:4</a>) A good antidote to your own challenge is helping others with theirs. Anna, 17, says: “As I grew older, I came to realize that when I could help someone else who might be going through a similar situation<wbr />—or a worse one—<wbr />it was rewarding!”</p>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> Some names in this article have been changed.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>KEY SCRIPTURES</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p26">“Do not say, ‘Why were the former days better than these?’”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Ecclesiastes 7:10</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p27">“Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Ecclesiastes 6:9</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p28">“Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Proverbs 27:10</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxContent"><blockquote><p class="p30"><strong>JUAN</strong></p>
<p class="p31">“Young people can develop resilience by analyzing the situation they are coping with and realizing that change is a part of life. The quicker a person accepts that reality, the easier it will be to move on with life. Things do get better.”</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote><p class="p32"><strong>CARISSA</strong></p>
<p class="p33">“Once a difficulty has passed, I try not to relive it over and over in my mind. I just move on to the next challenge in life. Part of being resilient, I believe, is looking ahead rather than looking behind.”</p>
</blockquote>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Eccl. 9:11)</strong></a> I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events* overtake them all.</p><p></p><p>Or “unforeseen occurrence.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:10)</strong></a> Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Prov. 4:25)</strong></a> Your eyes should look straight ahead, Yes, fix your gaze* straight ahead of you.</p><p></p><p>Or “beaming eyes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(Eccl. 6:9)</strong></a> Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.* This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.</p><p></p><p>Or “than the walking about of the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:10)</strong></a> Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(Phil. 2:4)</strong></a> as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:10)</strong></a> Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <strong>(Eccl. 6:9)</strong></a> Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.* This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.</p><p></p><p>Or “than the walking about of the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:10)</strong></a> Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***g16 pp. 10-11 How to Deal With Change***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="featureTtl"><strong>HELP FOR THE FAMILY | YOUNG PEOPLE</strong></p>
<h1><strong>How to Deal With Change</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>THE CHALLENGE</strong></h2>
<ul class="noMarker"><li><p class="p4">  Your dad’s job requires that your family relocate.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Your best friend is moving far away.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p6">  Your older sibling is leaving home to get married.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p7">How well would <em>you </em>adapt to such changes?</p>
<p class="p8">A tree that can bend with the wind is more likely to survive a storm. Like that tree, you can learn to “bend” with changes over which you have little or no control. Before discussing how you can do that, though, consider a few things you should know about change.</p>
<h2><strong>WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>Change is inevitable. </strong>The Bible states a fundamental truth about humans: “Unexpected events overtake them all.” (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Ecclesiastes 9:11</a>) Sooner or later, you will be confronted with the reality of those words. Of course, not all unexpected events are bad. And some changes that at first <em>seem </em>to be bad might turn out to be advantageous. Nevertheless, most people thrive on routine, while change<wbr />—whether good or bad—<wbr />rattles their comfort zone.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>Change can be particularly stressful for adolescents. </strong>Why? “You’re already going through <em>internal </em>changes,” explains a young man named Alex.<span id="footnotesource3"></span><a href="#footnote3">*</a> <em>“External </em>changes just add to the stress.”</p>
<p class="p12">Here is another reason: When adults face a change, they can refer to their personal ‘book of experience’ to see how they dealt with similar situations in the past. But young people have less history on which to draw.</p>
<p class="p13"><strong>You can learn to adapt. </strong>Resilience is the ability to recover from misfortune or adjust to change. A resilient person can not only <em>endure </em>a new circumstance but also look at a seeming obstacle and see an opportunity in it. Resilient teens are less likely to turn to drugs or alcohol when they feel overwhelmed.</p>
<h2><strong>WHAT YOU CAN DO</strong></h2>
<p class="p15"><strong>Accept reality. </strong>No doubt you would like to have total control of your life, but that is simply not possible. Friends will move away or marry; siblings will grow up and leave home; circumstances may force your family to move, leaving behind friends and all that is familiar. It is better to accept reality than to let negative thoughts overwhelm you.<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57"><em>Ecclesiastes 7:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Look ahead. </strong>Focusing on the past is like driving on a highway with your eyes fixed on the rearview mirror. An occasional glance is beneficial, but you really need to concentrate on the road ahead. The same is true when you are confronted with change. Try to keep your eyes fixed on the future. (<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Proverbs 4:25</a>) For example, what goal could you set for the next month, or six months?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>Focus on the positive. </strong>“Resilience is about attitude,” says a young woman named Laura. “Find positive aspects of the circumstance you are in.” Can you list at least one advantage that your new circumstance offers?<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"><em>Ecclesiastes 6:9</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p18">A young woman named Victoria recalls that in her teen years, all her close friends moved away. “I felt so lonely, and I wished that everything could have stayed the way it was,” she says. “But looking back, that’s when I really started to grow. I came to realize that growth <em>requires </em>change. That’s also when I started seeing possibilities for new friendships that were all around me.”<wbr />—<em>Bible principle: </em><span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60"><em>Proverbs 27:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p23">Focusing on the past is like driving on a highway with your eyes fixed on the rearview mirror</p>
</div>
<p class="p19"><strong>Do things for others. </strong>The Bible says: “Look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.” (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Philippians 2:4</a>) A good antidote to your own challenge is helping others with theirs. Anna, 17, says: “As I grew older, I came to realize that when I could help someone else who might be going through a similar situation<wbr />—or a worse one—<wbr />it was rewarding!”</p>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote3"><p><a href="#footnotesource3">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> Some names in this article have been changed.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>KEY SCRIPTURES</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p26">“Do not say, ‘Why were the former days better than these?’”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Ecclesiastes 7:10</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p27">“Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Ecclesiastes 6:9</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p28">“Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Proverbs 27:10</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxContent"><blockquote><p class="p30"><strong>JUAN</strong></p>
<p class="p31">“Young people can develop resilience by analyzing the situation they are coping with and realizing that change is a part of life. The quicker a person accepts that reality, the easier it will be to move on with life. Things do get better.”</p>
</blockquote>
<blockquote><p class="p32"><strong>CARISSA</strong></p>
<p class="p33">“Once a difficulty has passed, I try not to relive it over and over in my mind. I just move on to the next challenge in life. Part of being resilient, I believe, is looking ahead rather than looking behind.”</p>
</blockquote>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Eccl. 9:11)</strong></a> I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events* overtake them all.</p><p></p><p>Or “unforeseen occurrence.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:10)</strong></a> Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Prov. 4:25)</strong></a> Your eyes should look straight ahead, Yes, fix your gaze* straight ahead of you.</p><p></p><p>Or “beaming eyes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Eccl. 6:9)</strong></a> Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.* This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.</p><p></p><p>Or “than the walking about of the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:10)</strong></a> Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Phil. 2:4)</strong></a> as you look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:10)</strong></a> Do not say, “Why were the former days better than these?” for it is not out of wisdom that you ask this.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Eccl. 6:9)</strong></a> Better to enjoy what the eyes see than to wander after one’s desires.* This too is futility, a chasing after the wind.</p><p></p><p>Or “than the walking about of the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:10)</strong></a> Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, And do not enter your own brother’s house on the day of your disaster; Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***bh pp. 164-166 Draw Close to God in Prayer***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> 3. What is one important reason why we should pray to Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>One important reason why we should pray to Jehovah is that he invites us to do so. His Word encourages us: “Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.” (<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Philippians 4:6, 7</a>) Surely we would not want to ignore such a kind provision made for us by the Supreme Ruler of the universe!</p>
<p class="qu"> 4. How does regular prayer to Jehovah strengthen our relationship with him?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Another reason to pray is that regularly praying to Jehovah is a way to strengthen our relationship with him. True friends do not communicate only when they need something. Rather, good friends are interested in each other, and their friendship becomes stronger as they freely express their thoughts, concerns, and feelings. In some respects, the situation is similar when it comes to our relationship with Jehovah God. With the help of this book, you have learned much about what the Bible teaches regarding Jehovah, his personality, and his purposes. You have come to know him as a real Person. Prayer gives you the opportunity to express your thoughts and innermost feelings to your heavenly Father. As you do, you draw closer to Jehovah.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">James 4:8</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Phil. 4:6, 7)</strong> Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers* by means of Christ Jesus.</p><p></p><p>Or “your minds; your thoughts.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:8)</strong> Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***sn song 91 My Father, My God and Friend***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 91</p>
<h1><strong>My Father, My God and Friend</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Hebrews 6:10</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Life in this world can be hard.</p>
<p class="p5">Life in this world can bring tears and pain.</p>
<p class="p6">Still ev’ry day I will say,</p>
<p class="p7">“My life is not in vain.”</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">For God is not unrighteous,</p>
<p class="p10">And he remembers the love I’ve shown.</p>
<p class="p11">So he is ever near me;</p>
<p class="p12">With Jehovah, I’m not alone.</p>
<p class="p13">Yes, God is my provider</p>
<p class="p14">and my protector down to the end.</p>
<p class="p15">Yes, Jehovah is my Father,</p>
<p class="p16">My God and Friend.</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. Gone are the days of my youth;</p>
<p class="p18">Days of calamity now are here.</p>
<p class="p19">Still through the eyes of my faith,</p>
<p class="p20">My hope is bright and clear.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p21">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p22">For God is not unrighteous,</p>
<p class="p23">And he remembers the love I’ve shown.</p>
<p class="p24">So he is ever near me;</p>
<p class="p25">With Jehovah, I’m not alone.</p>
<p class="p26">Yes, God is my provider</p>
<p class="p27">and my protector down to the end.</p>
<p class="p28">Yes, Jehovah is my Father,</p>
<p class="p29">My God and Friend.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p30">(See also <span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Ps. 71:17, 18</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Heb. 6:10)</strong></a> For God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Ps. 71:17, 18)</strong></a> O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***ia pp. 188-191 He Was Loyal in the Face of Tests***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1, 2. </strong>What was Peter likely hoping for as Jesus spoke in Capernaum, yet what happened instead?</p>
<p class="p3">PETER gazed anxiously around at the faces of Jesus’ audience. The setting was the synagogue in Capernaum. Peter’s home was in this town; his fishing business was here, on the northern shore of the Sea of Galilee; many of his friends, relatives, and business acquaintances lived here. No doubt Peter was hoping that his townsmen would see Jesus as he did and that they would share the thrill of learning about God’s Kingdom from the greatest of all teachers. No such outcome seemed likely that day.</p>
<p class="p4"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Many had stopped listening. Some were murmuring audibly, objecting to the thrust of Jesus’ message. Most troubling to Peter, though, was the reaction of some of Jesus’ own disciples. Their faces no longer bore that happy expression of enlightenment, the thrill of discovery, the joy of learning the truth. Now, they looked upset, even bitter. Some spoke up, calling Jesus’ speech shocking. Refusing to listen anymore, they left the synagogue<wbr />—and quit following Jesus as well.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69"><strong><em>John 6:60,</em></strong></a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> <strong><em>66</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>3. </strong>What did Peter’s faith help him to do a number of times?</p>
<p class="p5"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It was a difficult time for Peter and for his fellow apostles. Peter did not fully grasp what Jesus said that day. No doubt he could see why Jesus’ words might seem offensive if taken at face value. What would Peter do? It was not the first time that his loyalty to his Master was tested; nor would it be the last. Let us see how Peter’s faith helped him to rise to such challenges and remain loyal.</p>
<h2><strong>Loyal When Others Turned Disloyal</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>4, 5. </strong>How had Jesus acted in ways that were contrary to what people expected of him?</p>
<p class="p7"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Peter often found himself surprised by Jesus. Again and again, his Master acted and spoke in a way that was contrary to what people expected of Him. Just a day earlier, Jesus had miraculously fed a crowd of thousands. In response, they had attempted to make him king. Yet, he surprised many by withdrawing from them, directing his disciples to board a boat and sail toward Capernaum. As the disciples made their way over water during the night, Jesus surprised them again by walking across the stormy Sea of Galilee, giving Peter an important lesson in faith.</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>In the morning, they soon found that those crowds had followed them around the lake. Evidently, though, the people were driven by a desire to see Jesus produce more food miraculously, not by any hunger for spiritual truths. Jesus rebuked them for their materialistic spirit. (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">John 6:25-27</a>) That discussion continued at the synagogue in Capernaum, where Jesus again went against expectations in an effort to teach a vital but difficult truth.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>What illustration did Jesus give, and how did his listeners react?</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jesus wanted those people to see him, not as a source of mere physical food, but as a spiritual provision from God, as the one whose life and death as a man would make eternal life possible for others. So he gave an illustration comparing himself to manna, the bread that came down from heaven in Moses’ day. When some objected, he used a vivid illustration, explaining that it was necessary to partake of his flesh and his blood in order to attain life. It was at this point that the objections became insistent. Some said: “This speech is shocking; who can listen to it?” Many of Jesus’ own disciples decided to quit following him.<span id="footnotesource4"></span><a href="#footnote4">*</a><wbr />—<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">John 6:48-60,</a><span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73"> 66</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>7, 8. </strong>(a) What did Peter not yet grasp about Jesus’ role? (b) How did Peter answer Jesus’ question to the apostles?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>What would Peter do? He too must have been baffled by Jesus’ speech. He did not yet grasp that Jesus must die in order to carry out God’s will. Was Peter tempted to slink off like those fickle disciples who left Jesus that day? No; something important set Peter apart from those men. What was it?</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jesus turned to his apostles and said: “You do not want to go also, do you?” (<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">John 6:67</a>) He addressed the 12, but it was Peter who spoke up. It was often so. Peter may have been the oldest of them. In any case, he was certainly the most outspoken of the group; rarely, it seems, did Peter hesitate to say what was on his mind. In this case, what was on his mind was this beautiful and memorable statement: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">John 6:68</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>9. </strong>How did Peter show loyalty to Jesus?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not those words touch your heart? Peter’s faith in Jesus had helped him to build a priceless quality<wbr />—loyalty. Peter saw clearly that Jesus was the only Savior Jehovah had provided and that Jesus saved by means of his sayings<wbr />—his teachings about the Kingdom of God. Peter knew that even if there were some things that puzzled him, there was nowhere else to go if he wanted God’s favor and the blessing of everlasting life.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p58">We need to be loyal to Jesus’ teachings, even when they run contrary to our expectations or personal preference</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"><strong>10. </strong>How can we today imitate Peter’s loyalty?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Is that how you feel? Sadly, many in today’s world claim to love Jesus but fail the test of loyalty. Genuine loyalty to Christ requires that we share Peter’s view of Jesus’ teachings. We need to learn them, to grasp their meaning, and to live by them<wbr />—even when they surprise us by running contrary to our expectations or personal preferences. Only by proving loyal can we hope to attain to the everlasting life that Jesus wants for us.<wbr /><em>—<strong>Read </strong></em><strong></strong><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"><strong><em>Psalm 97:10</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<h2><strong>Loyal When Corrected</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>11. </strong>Jesus led his followers on what trek? (See also footnote.)</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Not long after that busy time, Jesus led his apostles and some disciples on a long trek northward. The snowcapped peak of Mount Hermon, at the northernmost limit of the Promised Land, was at times visible even from the blue waters of the Sea of Galilee. Gradually, that mountain loomed higher as the group approached, following the rising terrain up to the villages near Caesarea Philippi.<span id="footnotesource5"></span><a href="#footnote5">*</a> In this lovely setting, with a perspective over much of the Promised Land to the south, Jesus asked his followers an important question.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>12, 13. </strong>(a) Why did Jesus ask about the crowds and their view of him? (b) In his words to Jesus, how did Peter show genuine faith?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“Who are the crowds saying that I am?” he wanted to know. We can just imagine Peter looking into Jesus’ keen eyes, sensing again his Master’s kindness and his powerful, clear intelligence. Jesus was interested in the conclusions his audiences were drawing from what they saw and heard. Jesus’ disciples answered the question, repeating some of the popular misconceptions surrounding Jesus’ identity. But Jesus wanted to know more. Were his closest followers making the same mistakes? “You, though, who do you say I am?” he asked.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Luke 9:18-20</a>.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Again, Peter was quick to respond. He put into clear, bold words the conclusion that had formed in the hearts of many there. “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God,” he said. We can imagine Jesus giving Peter a smile of approval as He commended him warmly. Jesus reminded Peter that it was Jehovah God<wbr />—not any man—<wbr />who had made this vital truth so plain to those with genuine faith. Peter had been enabled to discern one of the greatest truths Jehovah had yet revealed<wbr />—the identity of the long-promised Messiah, or Christ!<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78"><strong><em>Matthew 16:16,</em></strong> <strong><em>17</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(John 6:60)</strong> When they heard this, many of his disciples said: “This speech is shocking; who can listen to it?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(John 6:66)</strong> Because of this, many of his disciples went off to the things behind and would no longer walk with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 6:25-27)</strong> When they found him across the sea, they said to him: “Rabbi, when did you get here?” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Jesus answered them: “Most truly I say to you, you are looking for me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate from the loaves and were satisfied. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for everlasting life, which the Son of man will give you; for on this one the Father, God himself, has put his seal of approval.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 6:48-60)</strong> “I am the bread of life. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Your forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness and yet they died. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that anyone may eat of it and not die. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread he will live forever; and for a fact, the bread that I will give is my flesh in behalf of the life of the world.” <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>Then the Jews began to argue with one another, saying: “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>So Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you have no life in yourselves. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life, and I will resurrect him on the last day; <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>for my flesh is true food and my blood is true drink. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>Whoever feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood remains in union with me, and I in union with him. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>Just as the living Father sent me and I live because of the Father, so also the one who feeds on me will live because of me. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>This is the bread that came down from heaven. It is not as when your forefathers ate and yet died. Whoever feeds on this bread will live forever.” <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>He said these things as he was teaching in a synagogue* in Ca·perʹna·um. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>When they heard this, many of his disciples said: “This speech is shocking; who can listen to it?”</p><p></p><p>Or “public assembly.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 6:66)</strong> Because of this, many of his disciples went off to the things behind and would no longer walk with him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(John 6:67)</strong> So Jesus said to the Twelve: “You do not want to go also, do you?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(John 6:68)</strong> Simon Peter answered him: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 97:10)</strong> O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives* of his loyal ones; He rescues them from the hand* of the wicked.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Luke 9:18-20)</strong> Later, while he was praying alone, the disciples came to him, and he questioned them, saying: “Who are the crowds saying that I am?” <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>In reply they said: “John the Baptist, but others say E·liʹjah, and still others say that one of the ancient prophets has risen.” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Then he said to them: “You, though, who do you say I am?” Peter answered: “The Christ of God.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 16:16, 17)</strong> Simon Peter answered: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.” <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>In response Jesus said to him: “Happy you are, Simon son of Joʹnah, because flesh and blood* did not reveal it to you, but my Father in the heavens did.</p><p></p><p>Or “because a human.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote4"><p><a href="#footnotesource4">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> We can see the inconstancy of the crowd at the synagogue if we compare their reactions to Jesus’ speech here with their expressions just the day before when they enthusiastically proclaimed him a prophet of God.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">John 6:14</a>.</p></div>
<div id="footnote5"><p><a href="#footnotesource5">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> From the shores of the Sea of Galilee, that 30-mile (50 km) journey took the group from about 700 feet (210 m) below sea level to 1,150 feet (350 m) above, through regions of great natural beauty.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(John 6:14)</strong></a> When the people saw the sign he performed, they began to say: “This really is the Prophet who was to come into the world.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016287.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***sn song 131 Jehovah Provides Escape***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 131</p>
<h1><strong>Jehovah Provides Escape</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">2 Samuel 22:1-8</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. The living God, Jehovah, you have proved to be;</p>
<p class="p5">Your mighty works abound in earth and sky and sea.</p>
<p class="p6">No rival god can equal what you have done<wbr />—there is none.</p>
<p class="p7">Our foes will be consumed.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">Jehovah provides escape for the loyal.</p>
<p class="p10">His servants will see what a mighty Crag is he.</p>
<p class="p11">So with courage and faith in our God, we spread the fame</p>
<p class="p12">Of Jehovah, our Source of escape, and praise his name.</p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. Though ropes of death encircle me, I call to you,</p>
<p class="p14">“Jehovah, give me strength, and give me courage too.”</p>
<p class="p15">From your own temple dwelling, you hear my plea, “Shelter me;</p>
<p class="p16">Rescue me, O my God.”</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">Jehovah provides escape for the loyal.</p>
<p class="p19">His servants will see what a mighty Crag is he.</p>
<p class="p20">So with courage and faith in our God, we spread the fame</p>
<p class="p21">Of Jehovah, our Source of escape, and praise his name.</p>
</div>
<p class="p22">3. From heaven you will thunder and give forth your voice.</p>
<p class="p23">Your enemies will quake; your servants will rejoice.</p>
<p class="p24">You prove to be whatever you need to be; all will see</p>
<p class="p25">How you provide escape.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p26">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p27">Jehovah provides escape for the loyal.</p>
<p class="p28">His servants will see what a mighty Crag is he.</p>
<p class="p29">So with courage and faith in our God, we spread the fame</p>
<p class="p30">Of Jehovah, our Source of escape, and praise his name.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p31">(See also <span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Ps. 18:1, 2;</a><span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82"> 144:1, 2</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(2 Sam. 22:1-8)</strong></a> And David spoke to Jehovah the words of this song in the day that Jehovah rescued him out of the hand of all his enemies and out of Saul’s hand. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He said: “Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, My shield and my horn* of salvation,* my secure refuge* And my place to flee, my savior; you who save me from violence.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I call on Jehovah, who is worthy of praise, And I will be saved from my enemies.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The waves of death broke all around me; Flash floods of worthless men terrified me.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The ropes of the Grave* surrounded me; The snares of death confronted me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In my distress I called on Jehovah, To my God I kept calling. Then from his temple he heard my voice, And my cry for help reached his ears.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Back and forth the earth began to shake and rock; The foundations of the heavens trembled And shook back and forth because he had been angered.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my powerful savior.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Ps. 18:1, 2)</strong></a> I have affection for you, O Jehovah, my strength.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah is my crag and my stronghold and the One who rescues me. My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, My shield and my horn* of salvation,* my secure refuge.*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my powerful savior.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Ps. 144:1, 2)</strong></a> May Jehovah, my Rock, be praised, Who trains my hands for battle, My fingers for warfare.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He is my loyal love and my stronghold, My secure refuge* and my rescuer, My shield and the One in whom I have taken shelter, The One subduing peoples under me.</p><p></p><p>Or “secure height.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
