<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 August 1-7</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016282.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 87:0-91:16)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. A song. <strong>87 </strong>His city’s foundation is in the holy mountains.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah loves the gates of Zion More than all the tents of Jacob.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Glorious things are being said about you, O city of the true God. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will count Raʹhab and Babylon among those who know* me; Here are Phi·lisʹti·a and Tyre, together with Cush. It will be said: “This is one who was born there.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>And about Zion it will be said: “Each and every one was born in her.” And the Most High will firmly establish her.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah will declare, when recording the peoples: “This is one who was born there.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Singers and those performing circle dances will say: “All my springs are in you.”* </p><p>A song. A melody of the sons of Korʹah. To the director; in the style of Maʹha·lath,* to be sung alternately. Masʹkil* of Heʹman the Ezʹra·hite. <strong>88 </strong>O Jehovah, the God of my salvation, By day I cry out, And by night I come before you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let my prayer come to you, Incline your ear* to my cry for help.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my soul* has been filled with calamity, And my life is on the brink of the Grave.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I am already counted among those going down to the pit;* I have become a helpless man,*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Left among the dead Like the slain lying in a grave, Whom you remember no longer And who have been separated from your care.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You have put me in the lowest pit, In dark places, in a large abyss.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Your rage weighs heavily on me, And you overwhelm me with your crashing waves. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You have driven my acquaintances far away from me; You have made me something detestable to them. I am trapped and cannot escape.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>My eye is worn out because of my affliction. I call on you, O Jehovah, all day long; To you I spread out my hands. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Will you perform wonders for the dead? Can those powerless in death rise up to praise you? (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Will your loyal love be declared in the grave, Your faithfulness in the place of destruction?* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Will your wonders be known in the darkness Or your righteousness in the land of oblivion? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But I still cry to you for help, O Jehovah, Each morning my prayer comes before you. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Why, O Jehovah, do you reject me?* Why do you hide your face from me? <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>From my youth on, I have been afflicted and ready to perish; I am numb from the terrible things you allow me to suffer. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your burning anger overwhelms me; Your terrors destroy me. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>They surround me like waters all day long; They close in on me from all sides.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>You have driven my friends and companions far away from me; Darkness has become my companion. </p><p>Masʹkil.* Of Eʹthan the Ezʹra·hite. <strong>89 </strong>I will sing about Jehovah’s expressions of loyal love forever. With my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For I have said: “Loyal love will be built up* forever, And you have firmly established your faithfulness in the heavens.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have sworn to David my servant:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>‘I will firmly establish your offspring* forever, And I will build up your throne for all generations.’” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The heavens praise your marvels, O Jehovah, Yes, your faithfulness in the congregation of the holy ones.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For who in the skies can compare to Jehovah? Who among the sons of God is like Jehovah?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God is held in awe in the council* of holy ones; He is grand and awe-inspiring to all who are around him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, Who is mighty like you, O Jah? Your faithfulness surrounds you.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You rule over the raging of the sea; When its waves surge, you calm them. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You have crushed Raʹhab like one who is slain. With your strong arm you have scattered your enemies. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The heavens are yours, and the earth is yours; The productive land and what fills it—you have founded them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The north and the south—you created them; Taʹbor and Herʹmon joyously praise your name. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your arm is mighty; Your hand is strong; Your right hand is exalted. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne; Loyal love and faithfulness stand before you. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting. O Jehovah, they walk in the light of your face. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>They rejoice in your name all day long, And in your righteousness they are exalted. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For you are the glory of their strength, And by your approval our strength* is exalted. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For our shield belongs to Jehovah, Our king belongs to the Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>At that time you spoke in a vision to your loyal ones and said: “I have granted strength to a mighty one; I have exalted a chosen one from among the people. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I have found David my servant; With my holy oil I have anointed him. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My hand will support him, And my arm will strengthen him. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>No enemy will exact tribute from him, And no unrighteous man will oppress him. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>I will crush to pieces his adversaries from before him And strike down those who hate him. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My faithfulness and loyal love are with him, And in my name his strength* will be exalted. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I will put his hand* over the sea And his right hand over the rivers. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He will call out to me: ‘You are my Father, My God and the Rock of my salvation.’ <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And I will place him as firstborn, The highest of the kings of the earth. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>I will maintain my loyal love for him forever, And my covenant with him will never fail. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>I will establish his offspring* forever And make his throne as enduring as the heavens. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>If his sons leave my law And do not walk according to my decrees,* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>If they violate my statutes And do not keep my commandments, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Then I will punish their disobedience* with a rod And their error with flogging. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>But I will never abandon my loyal love for him Nor be untrue to my promise.* <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>I will not violate my covenant Or change what my lips have spoken. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>I have sworn in my holiness, once and for all; I will not tell lies to David. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>His offspring* will endure forever; His throne will endure like the sun before me. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Like the moon, it will be firmly established forever As a faithful witness in the skies.” (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>But you yourself have cast off and rejected him; You have become furious with your anointed one. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>You have spurned the covenant with your servant; You have profaned his crown* by throwing it to the ground. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>You have broken down all his stone walls;* You have reduced his fortifications to ruins. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>All who pass by have pillaged him; He is a reproach to his neighbors. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>You have made his adversaries victorious;* You have caused all his enemies to rejoice. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>You have also driven back his sword, And you have made him lose ground in the battle. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>You have brought an end to his splendor And hurled his throne to the ground. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>You have cut short the days of his youth; You have clothed him with shame. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>How long, O Jehovah, will you hide yourself? Will it be forever? Will your rage continue to burn like a fire? <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Remember how short my life is! Was it to no purpose that you created all humans? <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>What man can live and never see death? Can he save himself* from the power of the Grave?* (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Where are your former acts of loyal love, O Jehovah, That you swore about to David in your faithfulness? <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>Remember, O Jehovah, the taunts hurled at your servants; How I have to bear* the taunts of all the peoples; <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>How your enemies have hurled insults, O Jehovah; How they have insulted every footstep of your anointed one. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised forever. Amen and Amen. </p><p>A prayer of Moses, the man of the true God. <strong>90 </strong>O Jehovah, you have been our dwelling place* throughout all generations.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before the mountains were born Or you brought forth* the earth and the productive land, From everlasting to everlasting,* you are God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You make mortal man return to dust; You say: “Return, you sons of men.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For a thousand years are in your eyes just as yesterday when it is past, Just as a watch during the night.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You sweep them away; they become like mere sleep; In the morning they are like grass that sprouts.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In the morning it blossoms and is renewed, But by evening it withers and dries up.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For we are consumed by your anger And terrified by your rage.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You place our errors in front of you;* Our secrets are exposed by the light of your face.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Our days ebb* away because of your fury; And our years come to an end like a whisper.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The span of our life is 70 years, Or 80 if one is especially strong.* But they are filled with trouble and sorrow; They quickly pass by, and away we fly. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Who can fathom the power of your anger? Your fury is as great as the fear you deserve. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Teach us how to count our days So that we may acquire a heart of wisdom. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Return, O Jehovah! How long will this last? Have pity on your servants. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Satisfy us with your loyal love in the morning, So that we may shout joyfully and rejoice during all our days. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Make us rejoice in proportion to the days you have afflicted us, For as many years as we have experienced calamity. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>May your servants see your activity, And may their sons see your splendor. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May the favor of Jehovah our God be upon us; May you prosper* the work of our hands. Yes, prosper* the work of our hands. </p><p><strong>91 </strong>Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most High Will lodge under the shadow of the Almighty.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold, My God in whom I trust.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher, From the destructive pestilence.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With his pinions he will cover* you, And under his wings you will take refuge. His faithfulness will be a large shield and a protective wall.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You will not fear the terrors of the night, Nor the arrow that flies by day,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Nor the pestilence that stalks in the gloom, Nor the destruction that ravages at midday.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>A thousand will fall at your side And ten thousand at your right hand, But to you it will not come near.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You will only see it with your eyes As you witness the punishment* of the wicked.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>No disaster will befall you, And no plague will come near your tent. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For he will give his angels a command concerning you, To guard you in all your ways. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They will carry you on their hands, So that you may not strike your foot against a stone. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>On the young lion and the cobra you will tread; You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>God said: “Because he has affection for me,* I will rescue him. I will protect him because he knows* my name. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He will call on me, and I will answer him. I will be with him in distress. I will rescue him and glorify him. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I will satisfy him with long life, And I will cause him to see my acts of salvation.”*</p><p></p><p>Or “acknowledge.”</p><p>Or “For me, you are the source of all things.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “grave.”</p><p>Or “like a man without strength.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Or “in Abaddon.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or possibly, “all at once.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “endure.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “assembly.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “authority.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “judgments.”</p><p>Or “rebellion.”</p><p>Lit., “Nor be false with my faithfulness.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “diadem.”</p><p>Or “his shelters of stone.”</p><p>Lit., “lifted up the right hand of his adversaries.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “the hand of Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “carry in my bosom.”</p><p>Or possibly, “our refuge.”</p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “You are aware of our errors.”</p><p>Or “Our life ebbs.”</p><p>Or “a sigh.”</p><p>Or “because of special mightiness.”</p><p>Or “firmly establish.”</p><p>Or “firmly establish.”</p><p>Or “block approach to.”</p><p>Or “a bulwark.”</p><p>Lit., “retribution.”</p><p>Or possibly, “fortress; refuge.”</p><p>Lit., “he has joined himself to me.”</p><p>Or “acknowledges.”</p><p>Or “see salvation from me.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016282.xhtml#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Ps. 90:1-17)</strong></a> <span id="citation8"></span>O Jehovah, you have been our dwelling place* throughout all generations.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before the mountains were born Or you brought forth* the earth and the productive land, From everlasting to everlasting,* you are God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You make mortal man return to dust; You say: “Return, you sons of men.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For a thousand years are in your eyes just as yesterday when it is past, Just as a watch during the night.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You sweep them away; they become like mere sleep; In the morning they are like grass that sprouts.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In the morning it blossoms and is renewed, But by evening it withers and dries up.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For we are consumed by your anger And terrified by your rage.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You place our errors in front of you;* Our secrets are exposed by the light of your face.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Our days ebb* away because of your fury; And our years come to an end like a whisper.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The span of our life is 70 years, Or 80 if one is especially strong.* But they are filled with trouble and sorrow; They quickly pass by, and away we fly. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Who can fathom the power of your anger? Your fury is as great as the fear you deserve. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Teach us how to count our days So that we may acquire a heart of wisdom. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Return, O Jehovah! How long will this last? Have pity on your servants. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Satisfy us with your loyal love in the morning, So that we may shout joyfully and rejoice during all our days. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Make us rejoice in proportion to the days you have afflicted us, For as many years as we have experienced calamity. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>May your servants see your activity, And may their sons see your splendor. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May the favor of Jehovah our God be upon us; May you prosper* the work of our hands. Yes, prosper* the work of our hands.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “our refuge.”</p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “You are aware of our errors.”</p><p>Or “Our life ebbs.”</p><p>Or “a sigh.”</p><p>Or “because of special mightiness.”</p><p>Or “firmly establish.”</p><p>Or “firmly establish.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 49 Jehovah Is Our Refuge***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 49</p>
<h1><strong>Jehovah Is Our Refuge</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Psalm 91</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Jehovah is our refuge,</p>
<p class="p5">Our God in whom we trust.</p>
<p class="p6">His shadow is our shelter;</p>
<p class="p7">Abide in it we must.</p>
<p class="p8">For he himself will us defend,</p>
<p class="p9">Upon his might we can depend.</p>
<p class="p10">Jehovah is a stronghold,</p>
<p class="p11">Giving shelter to all the just.</p>
<p class="p12">2. Though thousands will be falling</p>
<p class="p13">Along your very side,</p>
<p class="p14">Among those who are loyal,</p>
<p class="p15">In safety you’ll reside.</p>
<p class="p16">You will not need to quake with fear,</p>
<p class="p17">As though great harm to you were near.</p>
<p class="p18">Your eyes will merely see it,</p>
<p class="p19">Underneath God’s wings you’ll abide.</p>
<p class="p20">3. Protection God will give you</p>
<p class="p21">From snares along your way,</p>
<p class="p22">And never will you falter</p>
<p class="p23">In fear or in dismay.</p>
<p class="p24">The maned young lion, you’ll not dread;</p>
<p class="p25">Upon the cobra you will tread.</p>
<p class="p26">Jehovah is our refuge,</p>
<p class="p27">Ever guarding us on our way.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Ps. 97:10;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> 121:3,</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 5;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> Isa. 52:12</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 91:1-16)</strong></a> Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most High Will lodge under the shadow of the Almighty.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold, My God in whom I trust.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher, From the destructive pestilence.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With his pinions he will cover* you, And under his wings you will take refuge. His faithfulness will be a large shield and a protective wall.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You will not fear the terrors of the night, Nor the arrow that flies by day,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Nor the pestilence that stalks in the gloom, Nor the destruction that ravages at midday.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>A thousand will fall at your side And ten thousand at your right hand, But to you it will not come near.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You will only see it with your eyes As you witness the punishment* of the wicked.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>No disaster will befall you, And no plague will come near your tent. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For he will give his angels a command concerning you, To guard you in all your ways. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They will carry you on their hands, So that you may not strike your foot against a stone. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>On the young lion and the cobra you will tread; You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>God said: “Because he has affection for me,* I will rescue him. I will protect him because he knows* my name. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He will call on me, and I will answer him. I will be with him in distress. I will rescue him and glorify him. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I will satisfy him with long life, And I will cause him to see my acts of salvation.”*</p><p></p><p>Or “block approach to.”</p><p>Or “a bulwark.”</p><p>Lit., “retribution.”</p><p>Or possibly, “fortress; refuge.”</p><p>Lit., “he has joined himself to me.”</p><p>Or “acknowledges.”</p><p>Or “see salvation from me.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 97:10)</strong></a> O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives* of his loyal ones; He rescues them from the hand* of the wicked.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 121:3)</strong></a> He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.</p><p></p><p>Or “totter.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 121:5)</strong></a> Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Isa. 52:12)</strong></a> For you will not depart in panic, Nor will you have to flee, For Jehovah will go ahead of you, And the God of Israel will be your rear guard.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w10 2/15 pp. 26-27 Welcome to the Best Way of Life!***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p14"><strong>Safe in “the Secret Place”</strong></p>
<p class="qu">10, 11. What is “the secret place of the Most High,” and how can we gain access to it?</p>
<p class="p15"><sup>10 </sup>Dedication and baptism result in another rich blessing<wbr />—the privilege of dwelling in “the secret place of the Most High.” (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"><em>Psalm 91:1</em></a><em>.</em>) This is a figurative place of safety and security<wbr />—a condition, or state, of protection from spiritual harm. It is a “secret place” because it is unknown to people who lack spiritual vision and do not trust in God. By living in harmony with our dedication and by exercising complete confidence in Jehovah, in effect we are saying to him: “You are my refuge and my stronghold, my God, in whom I will trust.” (<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Ps. 91:2</a>) Jehovah God becomes our secure dwelling place. (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Ps. 91:9</a>) Who could ask for more than that?</p>
<p class="p16"><sup>11 </sup>Gaining access to “the secret place” of Jehovah also implies that we have been blessed with the privilege of having developed a personal relationship with him. This begins with dedication and baptism. Thereafter, we build on our relationship with God by drawing close to him through Bible study, heartfelt prayer, and full obedience. (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Jas. 4:8</a>) No one has ever been closer to Jehovah than Jesus, whose confidence in the Creator has never wavered. (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">John 8:29</a>) Therefore, let us never doubt Jehovah or his desire and ability to help us fulfill our dedication vow. (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Eccl. 5:4</a>) The spiritual provisions that God has made for his people are undeniable evidence that he truly loves us and wants us to succeed in serving him.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:1)</strong> Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most High Will lodge under the shadow of the Almighty.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:2)</strong> I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold, My God in whom I trust.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:9)</strong> Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;*</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “fortress; refuge.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:8)</strong> Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(John 8:29)</strong> And the One who sent me is with me; he did not abandon me to myself, because I always do the things pleasing to him.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 5:4)</strong> Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w07 10/1 pp. 26-30 Deliverance From the Traps of the Birdcatcher***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 1. Who is “the birdcatcher,” and why is he dangerous?</p>
<p class="p3">ALL true Christians face a predator, one with superhuman intelligence and craftiness. He is referred to at <span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Psalm 91:3</a> as “the birdcatcher.” Who is this enemy? Since the issue of June 1, 1883, this magazine has identified him as none other than Satan the Devil. This formidable foe cunningly endeavors to mislead and trap Jehovah’s people as a birdcatcher tries to trap a bird.</p>
<p class="qu"> 2. Why is Satan likened to a birdcatcher?</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>In ancient times, birds were captured for their beautiful singing, for their colorful plumage, as well as for food and for sacrifice. However, birds are naturally cautious, skittish creatures, difficult to trap. Therefore, a birdcatcher in Bible times first carefully studied the peculiarities and habits of the type of birds he wished to ensnare. Then, he devised cunning methods to trap them. In likening Satan to a birdcatcher, the Bible helps us understand his methods. The Devil studies us as individuals. He notes our habits and characteristics and sets hidden traps in an attempt to catch us alive. (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">2 Timothy 2:26</a>) Being caught by him would mean our spiritual ruin and could lead to our ultimate destruction. Hence, for our protection, we need to identify various schemes of “the birdcatcher.”</p>
<p class="qu">3, 4. When do Satan’s tactics resemble those of a lion? a cobra?</p>
<p class="p5"><sup>3 </sup>Using vivid imagery, the psalmist also likens Satan’s tactics to those of a young lion or those of a cobra. (<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Psalm 91:13</a>) Like a lion, Satan at times makes open, frontal attacks by means of persecution or legislative action against Jehovah’s people. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Psalm 94:20</a>) Such lionlike attacks may cause a few to stumble. More often than not, however, these overt attacks backfire and result in a unifying of God’s people. What, though, of Satan’s more subtle, cobralike attacks?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>4 </sup>The Devil uses his superhuman intelligence to launch treacherous and deadly strikes like those of a poisonous snake from a hidden place. In this way, he has succeeded in poisoning the mind of some of God’s people, deceiving them into doing his will rather than Jehovah’s, with a tragic outcome. Happily, we are not ignorant of Satan’s designs. (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">2 Corinthians 2:11</a>) Let us now consider four of the deadly traps that are used by “the birdcatcher.”</p>
<p class="p7"><strong>Fear of Man</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 5. Why is the snare of “trembling at men” so effective?</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>“The birdcatcher” understands the normal human desire for acceptance and the approval of others. Christians are not callously indifferent to the thoughts and feelings of those around them. Knowing this, the Devil would like to exploit their concern for what people think of them. For example, he throws some of God’s people off balance by using the snare of “trembling at men.” (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Proverbs 29:25</a>) If because of fear of man, servants of God join others in doing what Jehovah forbids or refrain from doing what God’s Word commands them to do, they have been ensnared by “the birdcatcher.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Ezekiel 33:8;</a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> James 4:17</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 6. What example illustrates how a young person may be trapped by “the birdcatcher”?</p>
<p class="p9"><sup>6 </sup>For example, a young person may cave in to pressure from schoolmates and smoke a cigarette. Smoking a cigarette may have been the farthest thing from his mind when he left for school that day. Soon, though, he is doing something that is both harmful to his health and displeasing to God. (<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">2 Corinthians 7:1</a>) How was he enticed? Perhaps he got involved with the wrong sort of peers and was afraid to incur their disapproval. Young people, do not let “the birdcatcher” lure and trap you! To avoid being caught alive, guard against even small compromises. Heed the Bible’s warning to shun bad association.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">1 Corinthians 15:33</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 7. How might Satan cause some parents to lose their spiritual balance?</p>
<p class="p10"><sup>7 </sup>Conscientious Christian parents take seriously their Scriptural responsibility to provide materially for their families. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">1 Timothy 5:8</a>) However, Satan’s aim is to make Christians lose their balance in this regard. Perhaps they habitually miss meetings because they give in to pressure from their employers to do extra work. They may be afraid to ask for time off to attend all the sessions of a district convention to worship Jehovah with their brothers. The protection against this snare is to “trust in Jehovah.” (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Proverbs 3:5, 6</a>) Additionally, remembering that we are all members of Jehovah’s household and that he has obligated himself to watch over us will help us to maintain our balance. Parents, do you have faith that Jehovah will in one way or another care for you and your family when you do his will? Or will the Devil catch you alive and get you to do his will because of fear of man? We entreat you to consider these questions prayerfully.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>The Snare of Materialism</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 8. In what way does Satan use the lure of materialism?</p>
<p class="p12"><sup>8 </sup>Satan also uses the lure of materialism to entrap us. The commercial system of this world often promotes get-rich-quick schemes that may even beguile some of God’s people. At times, individuals may be urged: “Work hard. When you reach a comfortable position, you can take it easy and enjoy life. You can even pioneer.” Such words may be the unbalanced reasoning of some who take financial advantage of their associates in the Christian congregation. Think carefully about that incentive. Does it not mirror the thinking of the “unreasonable” rich man of Jesus’ parable?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Luke 12:16-21</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 9. Why might some Christians be ensnared by desiring things?</p>
<p class="p13"><sup>9 </sup>Satan operates his wicked system in such a way that it induces people to desire <em>things. </em>That desire can eventually make inroads into a Christian’s life, choking the word and making it “unfruitful.” (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Mark 4:19</a>) The Bible encourages us to be content with sustenance and covering. (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">1 Timothy 6:8</a>) However, many get ensnared by “the birdcatcher” because they do not apply that counsel to themselves. Could it be that pride makes them feel that they must adhere to a certain lifestyle? What about us personally? Does our desire to possess things cause us to push the interests of true worship into second place? (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Haggai 1:2-8</a>) Sadly, during hard economic times, some have sacrificed their spirituality in order to maintain the standard of living to which they had grown accustomed. Such a materialistic attitude delights “the birdcatcher”!</p>
<p class="p14"><strong>The Trap of Unwholesome Entertainment</strong></p>
<p class="qu">10. What self-examination should each Christian make?</p>
<p class="p15"><sup>10 </sup>Another tactic of “the birdcatcher” is to undermine people’s natural sense of what is good and what is bad. A mentality similar to that found in Sodom and Gomorrah has come to control much of the entertainment industry. Even news reports on television and in periodicals highlight violence and pander to a lurid interest in sex. Much of what appears as entertainment in the media blurs people’s ability “to distinguish both right and wrong.” (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Hebrews 5:14</a>) Recall, however, Jehovah’s words through the prophet Isaiah: “Woe to those who are saying that good is bad and bad is good!” (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Isaiah 5:20</a>) Has “the birdcatcher” insidiously affected your thinking with such unwholesome entertainment? Self-examination is essential.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">2 Corinthians 13:5</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">11. What warning about TV soap operas was given in this magazine?</p>
<p class="p16"><sup>11 </sup>Nearly a quarter of a century ago, <em>The Watchtower </em>lovingly warned the household of faith about TV serials.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> This observation was made about the subtle impact of popular soap operas: “The search for love is used to justify any conduct. For instance, one unwed pregnant youth says to a friend: ‘But I love Victor. I don’t care. . . . To have his baby is worth everything to me!’ The soft background music makes it hard to consider her course to be so bad. You too like Victor. You feel sympathy for the girl. You ‘understand.’ ‘It is amazing how you can rationalize,’ stated one viewer who later came to her senses. ‘We know that immorality is bad. . . . But I realized that <em>mentally </em>I was taking part.’”</p>
<p class="qu">12. What facts indicate the current appropriateness of the warning about certain TV programming?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>12 </sup>Since those articles were published, this type of heart-corrupting programming has become increasingly available. In many places, such programs are broadcast 24 hours a day. Men, women, and many teenagers frequently feed their minds and hearts on such entertainment. We, though, must not deceive ourselves with false reasoning. It would be wrong to reason that depraved entertainment is no worse than what is seen in the real world. Can a Christian really justify <em>choosing </em>to be entertained by the sort of people he would never dream of inviting into his home?</p>
<p class="qu">13, 14. How did some express how they benefited from warnings about TV?</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>13 </sup>Many benefited when they took to heart that warning provided by “the faithful and discreet slave.” (<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Matthew 24:45-47</a>) After reading the straightforward, Bible-based counsel, some wrote to tell how the articles had personally affected them.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> One confessed: “For 13 years I was a soap-opera addict. I thought that I was safe simply by attending Christian meetings and being semiregular in the field service. But I adopted the worldly soap-opera attitude that if your husband mistreats you or you feel unloved, adultery is justifiable<wbr />—he brought it on himself. And so when I felt ‘justified’ I took this bad course and sinned against Jehovah and my mate.” This woman was disfellowshipped. Eventually, she came to her senses, repented, and was reinstated. The articles warning against TV soap operas gave her the strength to refuse to be entertained by what Jehovah hates.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Amos 5:14, 15</a>.</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>14 </sup>Another reader whose life was affected said: “I cried when I read the articles, for I discovered that my heart was no longer complete toward Jehovah. I promised my God that I would no longer be a slave to these serials.” After expressing appreciation for the articles, one Christian woman admitted her addiction and wrote: “I wondered . . . if my relationship with Jehovah could be affected. How could I have ‘them’ as friends and also be a friend to Jehovah?” If such TV shows corrupted hearts 25 years ago, what impact do they have today? (<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">2 Timothy 3:13</a>) We must be aware of Satan’s trap of unwholesome entertainment in all its forms, whether TV soap operas, violent video games, or immoral music videos.</p>
<p class="p20"><strong>The Trap of Personal Differences</strong></p>
<p class="qu">15. How are some caught alive by the Devil?</p>
<p class="p21"><sup>15 </sup>Satan uses personal differences as a trap to cause divisions among Jehovah’s people. We can be trapped this way regardless of our privileges of service. Some are caught alive by the Devil because they allow personal differences to disrupt the peace and unity and the beautiful spiritual prosperity that Jehovah has brought into existence.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Psalm 133:1-3</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">16. How has Satan slyly been trying to disrupt our unity?</p>
<p class="p22"><sup>16 </sup>During World War I, Satan tried to destroy the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization by frontal attack, but he failed. (<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Revelation 11:7-13</a>) Since then, he has slyly been working to disrupt our unity. When we allow personal differences to cause disunity, we have provided “the birdcatcher” a foothold. We could thus hinder the free flow of holy spirit in our personal lives as well as in the congregation. If that were to happen, Satan would be pleased because any disruption of the peace and unity of the congregation interferes with the preaching work.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Ephesians 4:27,</a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> 30-32</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">17. What can help those who have personal differences to resolve them?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>17 </sup>What can you do if you have personal differences with a fellow Christian? Granted, every situation is unique. However, while there may be many reasons why problems develop, there is no reason why personal differences should be left unresolved. (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Matthew 5:23, 24;</a><span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47"> 18:15-17</a>) The advice in God’s Word is inspired, perfect. When applied, Bible principles never fail. They always work!</p>
<p class="qu">18. Why would imitating Jehovah help us resolve personal differences?</p>
<p class="p24"><sup>18 </sup>Jehovah is “ready to forgive,” and he grants “true forgiveness.” (<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Psalm 86:5;</a><span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49"> 130:4</a>) We show that we are beloved children of Jehovah when we imitate him. (<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">Ephesians 5:1</a>) We are all sinners and desperately in need of Jehovah’s forgiveness. Thus, we must be careful if we feel inclined not to forgive someone. We could become like the slave in Jesus’ parable who refused to forgive his fellow slave a debt that was but a fraction of the debt that his master had already forgiven him. When the master was informed, he had the unforgiving slave thrown into prison. Jesus concluded the parable by saying: “In like manner my heavenly Father will also deal with you if you do not forgive each one his brother from your hearts.” (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Matthew 18:21-35</a>) Meditating on that illustration and reflecting on how many times Jehovah has freely forgiven us will surely help us when we are trying to settle personal differences with our brother!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Psalm 19:14</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:3)</strong> For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher, From the destructive pestilence.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 2:26)</strong> and they may come to their senses and escape from the snare of the Devil, seeing that they have been caught alive by him to do his will.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:13)</strong> On the young lion and the cobra you will tread; You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 94:20)</strong> Can a throne* of corruption be allied with you While it is framing trouble in the name of the law?*</p><p></p><p>Or “rulers; judges.”</p><p>Or “by decree.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 2:11)</strong> so that we may not be overreached* by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his designs.*</p><p></p><p>Or “outwitted.”</p><p>Or “intentions; schemes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 29:25)</strong> Trembling at* men is* a snare, But the one trusting in Jehovah will be protected.</p><p></p><p>Or “Fear of.”</p><p>Or “lays.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ezek. 33:8)</strong> When I say to someone wicked, ‘Wicked one, you will surely die!’ but you do not speak out to warn the wicked one to change his course, he will die as a wicked man because of his own error, but I will ask his blood back from you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:17)</strong> Therefore, if someone knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 7:1)</strong> Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 15:33)</strong> Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.*</p><p></p><p>Or “corrupt good morals.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 5:8)</strong> Certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Luke 12:16-21)</strong> With that he told them an illustration, saying: “The land of a rich man produced well. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So he began reasoning within himself, ‘What should I do now that I have nowhere to gather my crops?’ <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my storehouses and build bigger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all my goods, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>and I will say to myself:* “You* have many good things stored up for many years; take it easy, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’ <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are demanding your life* from you. Who, then, is to have the things you stored up?’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So it goes with the man who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”</p><p></p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “Soul, you.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Mark 4:19)</strong> but the anxieties of this system of things* and the deceptive power of riches and the desires for everything else make inroads and choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.</p><p></p><p>Or “this age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 6:8)</strong> So, having food* and clothing,* we will be content with these things.</p><p></p><p>Or “sustenance.”</p><p>Or “shelter.” Lit., “covering.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Hag. 1:2-8)</strong> “This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘These people say, “The time has not yet come for the house* of Jehovah to be built.”’”* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And the word of Jehovah again came through Hagʹgai the prophet, saying: <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“Is it the time for you to dwell in your paneled houses, while this house lies in ruins? <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Now this is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Set your heart on* your ways. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You have sown much seed, but you harvest little. You eat, but it is not to satisfaction. You drink, but you do not drink your fill. You put on clothing, but no one gets warm. The one who hires himself out puts his wages in a bag full of holes.’” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>“This is what Jehovah of armies says, ‘Set your heart on* your ways.’ <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>“‘Go up to the mountain and bring in lumber. And build the house, so that I may take pleasure in it and I may be glorified,’ Jehovah says.”</p><p></p><p>Or “temple.”</p><p>Or “rebuilt.”</p><p>Or “Give careful thought to.”</p><p>Or “Give careful thought to.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 5:14)</strong> But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment* trained to distinguish both right and wrong.</p><p></p><p>Or “their perceptive powers.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 5:20)</strong> Woe to those who say that good is bad and bad is good, Those who substitute darkness for light and light for darkness, Those who put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 13:5)</strong> Keep testing whether you are in the faith; keep proving what you yourselves are. Or do you not recognize that Jesus Christ is in union with you? Unless you are disapproved.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Amos 5:14, 15)</strong> Search for what is good, and not what is bad, So that you may keep living. Then Jehovah the God of armies may be with you, Just as you say he is. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Hate what is bad, and love what is good, Let justice prevail in the city gate. It may be that Jehovah the God of armies Will show favor to the remaining ones of Joseph.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:13)</strong> But wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 133:1-3)</strong> Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 11:7-13)</strong> When they have finished their witnessing, the wild beast that ascends out of the abyss will wage war with them and conquer them and kill them. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>And their corpses will be on the main street of the great city that is in a spiritual sense called Sodʹom and Egypt, where their Lord was also executed on the stake. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>And those of the peoples and tribes and tongues* and nations will look at their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not allow their corpses to be laid in a tomb. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>And those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them and celebrate, and they will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those dwelling on the earth. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>After the three and a half days, spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who saw them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And they heard a loud voice from heaven say to them: “Come up here.” And they went up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>In that hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell; and 7,000 persons were killed by the earthquake, and the rest became frightened and gave glory to the God of heaven.</p><p></p><p>Or “languages.”</p><p>Or “were looking on.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 4:27)</strong> do not give the Devil an opportunity.*</p><p></p><p>Or “neither allow place for the Devil.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 4:30-32)</strong> Also, do not be grieving* God’s holy spirit, with which you have been sealed for a day of releasing by ransom. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Put away from yourselves every kind of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech, as well as everything injurious. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another just as God also by Christ freely forgave you.</p><p></p><p>Or “cause sorrow to.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 5:23, 24)</strong> “If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and there you remember that your brother has something against you, <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go away. First make your peace with your brother, and then come back and offer your gift.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 18:15-17)</strong> “Moreover, if your brother commits a sin, go and reveal his fault* between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But if he does not listen, take along with you one or two more, so that on the testimony* of two or three witnesses every matter may be established. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>If he does not listen to them, speak to the congregation. If he does not listen even to the congregation, let him be to you just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “and reprove him.”</p><p>Lit., “mouth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 86:5)</strong> For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 130:4)</strong> For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 5:1)</strong> Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved children,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 18:21-35)</strong> Then Peter came and said to him: “Lord, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?” <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jesus said to him: “I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to 77 times. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“That is why the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a king who wanted to settle accounts with his slaves. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When he started to settle them, a man was brought in who owed him 10,000 talents.* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But because he did not have the means to pay it back, his master ordered him and his wife and his children and all the things he owned to be sold and payment to be made. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>So the slave fell down and did obeisance* to him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay back everything to you.’ <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Moved with pity at this, the master of that slave let him off and canceled his debt. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But that slave went out and found one of his fellow slaves, who owed him 100 de·narʹi·i,* and grabbed him and began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay back whatever you owe.’ <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>So his fellow slave fell down and began to beg him, saying, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay you back.’ <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>However, he was not willing, but he went and had him thrown into prison until he could pay back what he owed. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>When his fellow slaves saw what had happened, they became greatly distressed, and they went and reported to their master all the things that had happened. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Then his master summoned him and said to him: ‘Wicked slave, I canceled all that debt for you when you pleaded with me. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Should you not also have shown mercy to your fellow slave as I showed mercy to you?’ <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>With that his master, provoked to wrath, handed him over to the jailers until he repaid all that he owed. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>My heavenly Father will also deal with you in the same way if each of you does not forgive your brother from your heart.”</p><p></p><p>10,000 talents of silver equaled 60,000,000 denarii. See App. B14.</p><p>Or “bowed down.”</p><p>See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 19:14)</strong> May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart Be pleasing to you, O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <em>The Watchtower, </em>December 1, 1982, pages 3-7.</p></div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <em>The Watchtower, </em>December 1, 1983, page 23.</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w10 1/15 pp. 10-11 Belonging to Jehovah—An Undeserved Kindness***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">13. How does Jehovah protect us from dangers that threaten our spiritual welfare?</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>13 </sup>How does Jehovah protect his people from these spiritual dangers? The psalm says: “He will give his own angels a command concerning you, to guard you in all your ways.” (<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Ps. 91:11</a>) Heavenly angels guide and protect us so that we can preach the good news. (<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Rev. 14:6</a>) In addition to the angels, Christian elders, by holding firmly to the Scriptures in their teaching, protect us from being deceived by false reasoning. They can provide individual help to any who are struggling to overcome worldly attitudes. (<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Titus 1:9;</a><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"> 1 Pet. 5:2</a>) Also, “the faithful and discreet slave” provides spiritual food to protect us against the teaching of evolution, the enticement of immoral desires, the pursuit of riches and prominence, and numerous other harmful desires and influences. (<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Matt. 24:45</a>) What has helped you to resist some of those dangers?</p>
<p class="qu">14. How can we take advantage of the protection God provides?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>14 </sup>What must we do to remain in God’s “secret place” of protection? Just as we constantly have to protect ourselves from physical dangers, such as accidents, criminals, or infections, so we must act continuously to protect ourselves from spiritual dangers. Hence, we should regularly take advantage of the guidance that Jehovah provides for us in our publications and at congregation meetings and assemblies. We seek the advice of the elders. And do we not benefit from the variety of qualities displayed by our Christian brothers and sisters? Indeed, our association with the congregation helps us to become wise.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Prov. 13:20</a>; <em>read </em><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"><em>1 Peter 4:10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:11)</strong> For he will give his angels a command concerning you, To guard you in all your ways.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 14:6)</strong> And I saw another angel flying in midheaven,* and he had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue* and people.</p><p></p><p>Or “in midair; overhead.”</p><p>Or “language.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Titus 1:9)</strong> holding firmly to the faithful word* as respects his art of teaching, so that he may be able both to encourage* by the teaching that is wholesome* and to reprove those who contradict.</p><p></p><p>Or “the trustworthy message.”</p><p>Or “exhort.”</p><p>Or “healthful; beneficial.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:2)</strong> Shepherd the flock of God under your care, serving as overseers,* not under compulsion, but willingly before God; not for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly;</p><p></p><p>Or “carefully watching over it.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 13:20)</strong> The one walking with the wise will become wise, But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 4:10)</strong> To the extent that each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness that is expressed in various ways.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w01 11/15 pp. 19-20 Jehovah Is Our Refuge***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p17"><strong>‘No Calamity Will Befall Us’</strong></p>
<p class="qu">13. What calamities do not befall us, and why?</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>13 </sup>Although this world’s security is breaking down, we put God first and take courage from the psalmist’s words: <em>“Because you said: ‘Jehovah is my refuge,’ you have made the Most High himself your dwelling;</em> <em>no calamity will befall you, and not even a plague will draw near to your tent.” </em>(<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Psalm 91:9, 10</a>) Yes, Jehovah is our refuge. However, we also make the Most High God ‘our dwelling,’ where we find safety. We laud Jehovah as the Universal Sovereign, ‘dwell’ in him as our Source of security, and declare the good news of his Kingdom. (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Matthew 24:14</a>) Therefore, ‘no calamity will befall us’<wbr />—none of the calamities described earlier in this psalm. Even when we share with others in such calamities as earthquakes, hurricanes, floods, famines, and ravages of warfare, these do not destroy our faith or our spiritual security.</p>
<p class="qu">14. As Jehovah’s servants, why are we not infected by deadly plagues?</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>14 </sup>Anointed Christians are like alien residents living in tents apart from this system of things. (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">1 Peter 2:11</a>) ‘Not even a plague draws near their tent.’ Whether our hope is heavenly or earthly, we are no part of the world, and we are not infected by such spiritually deadly plagues as its immorality, materialism, false religion, and worship of “the wild beast” and its “image,” the United Nations.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Revelation 9:20, 21;</a><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"> 13:1-18;</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> John 17:16</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">15. In what respects do we enjoy angelic help?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>15 </sup>Regarding the protection we enjoy, the psalmist adds: <em>“He </em>[<em>Jehovah</em>] <em>will give his own angels a command concerning you, to guard you in all your ways.</em> <em>Upon their hands they will carry you, that you may not strike your foot against any stone.” </em>(<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Psalm 91:11, 12</a>) Angels have been given power to protect us. (<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">2 Kings 6:17;</a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> Psalm 34:7-9;</a><span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69"> 104:4;</a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> Matthew 26:53;</a><span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71"> Luke 1:19</a>) They guard us ‘in all our ways.’ (<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Matthew 18:10</a>) We enjoy angelic guidance and guardianship as Kingdom proclaimers and do not stumble spiritually. (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Revelation 14:6, 7</a>) Even ‘stones’ such as bans against our work have not caused us to stumble and fall out of divine favor.</p>
<p class="qu">16. How do attacks carried out by a “young lion” and a “cobra” differ, and how do we react to them?</p>
<p class="p21"><sup>16 </sup>The psalmist continues: <em>“Upon the young lion and the cobra you will tread; </em><em>you will trample down the maned young lion and the big snake.” </em>(<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Psalm 91:13</a>) Just as a young lion makes an open, frontal attack, some of our enemies show their opposition openly by passing laws designed to stop our preaching work. But unexpected attacks like those of a cobra striking from a place of concealment are also made upon us. Hiding behind the scenes, the clergy sometimes attack us through lawmakers, judges, and others. But with Jehovah’s support, we peacefully seek redress in the courts, thus ‘defending and legally establishing the good news.’<wbr />—<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Philippians 1:7;</a><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"> Psalm 94:14,</a><span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77"> 20-22</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">17. How do we trample down “the maned young lion”?</p>
<p class="p22"><sup>17 </sup>The psalmist speaks of trampling down “the maned young lion and the big snake.” A maned young lion can be quite fierce, and a big snake can be a reptile of great size. (<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Isaiah 31:4</a>) Regardless of how fierce the maned young lion may be when making a frontal attack, though, we figuratively trample on it by obeying God rather than lionlike men or organizations. (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Acts 5:29</a>) So the menacing “lion” does not cause us spiritual injury.</p>
<p class="qu">18. “The big snake” may remind us of whom, and what do we need to do if we are under attack?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>18 </sup>In the Greek <em>Septuagint, </em>“the big snake” is called “a dragon.” This may well remind us of “the great dragon . . . , the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan.” (<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">Revelation 12:7-9;</a><span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81"> Genesis 3:15</a>) He is like a monstrous reptile capable of crushing and swallowing its prey. (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Jeremiah 51:34</a>) When Satan is trying to wrap his coils around us, crush us with this world’s pressures, and swallow us, let us shake ourselves loose and trample down this “big snake.” (<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">1 Peter 5:8</a>) The anointed remnant must do this if they are to share in the fulfillment of <span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">Romans 16:20</a>.</p>
<p class="p24"><strong>Jehovah<wbr />—Our Source of Salvation</strong></p>
<p class="qu">19. Why do we take refuge in Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p25"><sup>19 </sup>Concerning the true worshiper, the psalmist represents God as saying: <em>“Because on me he has set his affection, I shall also provide him with escape. I shall protect him because he has come to know my name.” </em>(<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Psalm 91:14</a>) The phrase “I shall protect him” is literally, “I shall place him on high,” that is, out of reach. We take refuge in Jehovah as his worshipers especially because ‘we have set our affection on him.’ (<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Mark 12:29, 30;</a><span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87"> 1 John 4:19</a>) In turn, God ‘provides us with escape’ from our enemies. Never will we be wiped off the earth. Rather, we will be saved because we know the divine name and call upon it in faith. (<span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88">Romans 10:11-13</a>) And we are determined to ‘walk in Jehovah’s name forever.’<wbr />—<span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89">Micah 4:5;</a><span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90"> Isaiah 43:10-12</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:9, 10)</strong> Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>No disaster will befall you, And no plague will come near your tent.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “fortress; refuge.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 2:11)</strong> Beloved, I urge you as foreigners and temporary residents to keep abstaining from fleshly desires, which wage war against you.*</p><p></p><p>Or “the soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 9:20, 21)</strong> But the rest of the people who were not killed by these plagues did not repent of the works of their hands; they did not stop worshipping the demons and the idols of gold and silver and copper and stone and wood, which can neither see nor hear nor walk. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>And they did not repent of their murders nor of their spiritistic practices nor of their sexual immorality* nor of their thefts.</p><p></p><p>Greek, <em>por·neiʹa. </em>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 13:1-18)</strong> And it* stood still on the sand of the sea. And I saw a wild beast ascending out of the sea, with ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns ten diadems,* but on its heads blasphemous names. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Now the wild beast that I saw was like a leopard, but its feet were like those of a bear, and its mouth was like a lion’s mouth. And the dragon gave to the beast its power and its throne and great authority. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I saw that one of its heads seemed to have been fatally wounded, but its mortal wound had been healed, and all the earth followed the wild beast with admiration. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And they worshipped the dragon because it gave the authority to the wild beast, and they worshipped the wild beast with the words: “Who is like the wild beast, and who can do battle with it?” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>It was given a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and it was given authority to act for 42 months. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And it opened its mouth in blasphemies against God to blaspheme his name and his dwelling place, even those residing in heaven. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>It was permitted to wage war with the holy ones and conquer them, and it was given authority over every tribe and people and tongue* and nation. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>And all those who dwell on the earth will worship it. From the founding of the world, not one of their names has been written in the scroll of life of the Lamb who was slaughtered. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If anyone has an ear, let him hear. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>If anyone is meant for captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone will kill with the sword,* he must be killed with the sword. This is where it calls for endurance and faith on the part of the holy ones. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Then I saw another wild beast ascending out of the earth, and it had two horns like a lamb, but it began speaking like a dragon. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>It exercises all the authority of the first wild beast in its sight. And it makes the earth and its inhabitants worship the first wild beast, whose mortal wound was healed. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>And it performs great signs, even making fire come down out of heaven to the earth in the sight of mankind. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>It misleads those who dwell on the earth, because of the signs that it was permitted to perform in the sight of the wild beast, while it tells those who dwell on the earth to make an image to the wild beast that had the sword-stroke and yet revived. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And it was permitted to give breath* to the image of the wild beast, so that the image of the wild beast should both speak and cause to be killed all those who refuse to worship the image of the wild beast. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>It puts under compulsion all people—the small and the great, the rich and the poor, the free and the slaves—that these should be marked on their right hand or on their forehead, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>and that nobody can buy or sell except a person having the mark, the name of the wild beast or the number of its name. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>This is where it calls for wisdom: Let the one who has insight calculate the number of the wild beast, for it is a man’s number,* and its number is 666.</p><p></p><p>That is, the dragon.</p><p>Or “royal headbands.”</p><p>Or “language.”</p><p>Or possibly, “If anyone is to be killed with the sword.”</p><p>Or “spirit.”</p><p>Or “a human number.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(John 17:16)</strong> They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:11, 12)</strong> For he will give his angels a command concerning you, To guard you in all your ways. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They will carry you on their hands, So that you may not strike your foot against a stone.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(2 Ki. 6:17)</strong> Then E·liʹsha began to pray and say: “O Jehovah, open his eyes, please, that he may see.” Immediately Jehovah opened the attendant’s eyes and he saw, and look! the mountainous region was full of horses and war chariots of fire all around E·liʹsha.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 34:7-9)</strong> The angel of Jehovah camps all around those fearing Him, And he rescues them.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Taste and see that Jehovah is good; Happy is the man who takes refuge in him.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Fear Jehovah, all you his holy ones, For those who fear him lack nothing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 104:4)</strong> He makes his angels spirits, His ministers a consuming fire.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 26:53)</strong> Or do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father to supply me at this moment more than 12 legions of angels?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Luke 1:19)</strong> In reply the angel said to him: “I am Gaʹbri·el, who stands near before God, and I was sent to speak with you and to declare this good news to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 18:10)</strong> See that you do not despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my Father who is in heaven.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 14:6, 7)</strong> And I saw another angel flying in midheaven,* and he had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue* and people. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He was saying in a loud voice: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of judgment by him has arrived, so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and the springs* of water.”</p><p></p><p>Or “in midair; overhead.”</p><p>Or “language.”</p><p>Or “fountains.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:13)</strong> On the young lion and the cobra you will tread; You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Phil. 1:7)</strong> It is only right for me to think this regarding all of you, since I have you in my heart, you who are sharers with me in the undeserved kindness both in my prison bonds and in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 94:14)</strong> For Jehovah will not forsake his people, Nor will he abandon his inheritance.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 94:20-22)</strong> Can a throne* of corruption be allied with you While it is framing trouble in the name of the law?* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They make vicious attacks on the righteous one* And condemn the innocent one to death.* <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>But Jehovah will become a secure refuge* for me, My God is my rock of refuge.</p><p></p><p>Or “rulers; judges.”</p><p>Or “by decree.”</p><p>Or “the soul of the righteous one.”</p><p>Lit., “And the blood of the innocent they declare guilty (wicked).”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 31:4)</strong> For this is what Jehovah has said to me: “Just as the lion growls, a strong young lion,* over its prey, When a whole group of shepherds is called together against it, And it is not terrified by their voice Or daunted by their commotion, So will Jehovah of armies come down to wage war Over Mount Zion and over her hill.</p><p></p><p>Or “a maned young lion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Acts 5:29)</strong> In answer Peter and the other apostles said: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 12:7-9)</strong> And war broke out in heaven: Miʹcha·el* and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>but they did not prevail,* nor was a place found for them any longer in heaven. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth; he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.</p><p></p><p>Meaning “Who Is Like God?”</p><p>Or possibly, “but it [that is, the dragon] was defeated.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:15)</strong> And I will put enmity* between you and the woman and between your offspring* and her offspring.* He will crush* your head, and you will strike* him in the heel.”</p><p></p><p>Or “hostility.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “bruise; strike.”</p><p>Or “bruise; crush.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Jer. 51:34)</strong> “King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar* of Babylon has devoured me; He has thrown me into confusion. He has set me down as an empty vessel. He has swallowed me down like a big snake; He has filled his stomach with my fine things. He has rinsed me away.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Nebuchadrezzar,” a variant spelling.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:8)</strong> Keep your senses, be watchful! Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.*</p><p></p><p>Or “looking for someone to devour.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 16:20)</strong> For his part, the God who gives peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly. May the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus be with you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 91:14)</strong> God said: “Because he has affection for me,* I will rescue him. I will protect him because he knows* my name.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “he has joined himself to me.”</p><p>Or “acknowledges.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Mark 12:29, 30)</strong> Jesus answered: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel, Jehovah* our God is one Jehovah,* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>and you must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(1 John 4:19)</strong> We love, because he first loved us.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 10:11-13)</strong> For the scripture says: “No one who rests his faith on him will be disappointed.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek. There is the same Lord over all, who is rich* toward all those calling on him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah* will be saved.”</p><p></p><p>Or “generous.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Mic. 4:5)</strong> For all the peoples will walk, each in the name of its god, But we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God forever and ever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 43:10-12)</strong> “You are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “Yes, my servant whom I have chosen, So that you may know and have faith in me* And understand that I am the same One. Before me no God was formed, And after me there has been none. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I—I am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“I am the One who declared and saved and made known When there was no foreign god among you. So you are my witnesses,” declares Jehovah, “and I am God.</p><p></p><p>Or “and trust me.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w14 10/15 pp. 10-11 Have Unshakable Faith in the Kingdom***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Consider what Jehovah promised King David of ancient Israel by means of the <strong><em>Davidic covenant. </em>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91"><strong>2 Samuel 7:12,</strong></a><span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92"> <strong>16</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Jehovah made this covenant with David during David’s reign in Jerusalem, promising him that the Messiah would be his descendant. (<span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93">Luke 1:30-33</a>) Thus, Jehovah further narrowed the line of descent of the offspring and established that an heir of David would have “the legal right” to the throne of the Messianic Kingdom. (<span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94">Ezek. 21:25-27</a>) Through Jesus, David’s kingship “will be firmly established forever.” Indeed, David’s offspring “will endure forever; his throne will endure like the sun.” (<span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95">Ps. 89:34-37</a>) Yes, the Messiah’s rule will never become corrupt, and its accomplishments will last forever!</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 7:12)</strong> When your days come to an end and you are laid to rest with your forefathers, then I will raise up your offspring* after you, your own son,* and I will firmly establish his kingdom.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “one who will come out of your inward parts.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 7:16)</strong> Your house and your kingdom will be secure forever before you; your throne will be firmly established forever.”’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Luke 1:30-33)</strong> So the angel said to her: “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And look! you will become pregnant* and give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and Jehovah* God will give him the throne of David his father, <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>and he will rule as King over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to his Kingdom.”</p><p></p><p>Or “conceive in your womb.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ezek. 21:25-27)</strong> “But your day has come, O fatally wounded, wicked chieftain of Israel, the time of your final punishment. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Remove the turban, and take off the crown. This will not remain the same. Raise up the low one, and bring low the high one. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>A ruin, a ruin, a ruin I will make it. And it will not belong to anyone until the one who has the legal right comes, and I will give it to him.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 89:34-37)</strong> I will not violate my covenant Or change what my lips have spoken. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>I have sworn in my holiness, once and for all; I will not tell lies to David. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>His offspring* will endure forever; His throne will endure like the sun before me. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Like the moon, it will be firmly established forever As a faithful witness in the skies.” (<em>Selah</em>)</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w07 7/15 p. 32 “A Faithful Witness in the Skies”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p4">Over 3,000 years ago, Jehovah God entered into the Kingdom covenant with King David of ancient Israel. (<span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96">2 Samuel 7:12-16</a>) The purpose of that covenant was to provide a legal basis for Jesus Christ, as David’s heir, to possess the throne forever. (<span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97">Isaiah 9:7;</a><span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98"> Luke 1:32, 33</a>) Referring to the throne of David’s “seed,” the psalmist sang: “As the moon it will be firmly established for time indefinite, and as a faithful witness in the skies.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99">Psalm 89:36, 37</a>.</p>
<p class="p5">The ‘luminary that dominates the night’<wbr />—the moon—<wbr />is a fitting reminder of the permanence of Christ’s rule. (<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Genesis 1:16</a>) Concerning his Kingdom, <span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Daniel 7:14</a> states: “His rulership is an indefinitely lasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom one that will not be brought to ruin.” The moon is a witness that reminds us of that Kingdom and the blessings it will bestow upon mankind.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <strong>(2 Sam. 7:12-16)</strong></a> When your days come to an end and you are laid to rest with your forefathers, then I will raise up your offspring* after you, your own son,* and I will firmly establish his kingdom. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He is the one who will build a house for my name, and I will firmly establish the throne of his kingdom forever. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I will become his father, and he will become my son. When he does wrong, I will reprove him with the rod of men and with the strokes of the sons of men.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My loyal love will not be taken away from him the way I took it away from Saul, whom I removed from before you. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your house and your kingdom will be secure forever before you; your throne will be firmly established forever.”’”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “one who will come out of your inward parts.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Adam.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <strong>(Isa. 9:7)</strong></a> To the increase of his rulership* And to peace, there will be no end, On the throne of David and on his kingdom In order to establish it firmly and to sustain it Through justice and righteousness, From now on and forever. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.</p><p></p><p>Or “government; princely rule.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <strong>(Luke 1:32, 33)</strong></a> This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High, and Jehovah* God will give him the throne of David his father, <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>and he will rule as King over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end to his Kingdom.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <strong>(Ps. 89:36, 37)</strong></a> His offspring* will endure forever; His throne will endure like the sun before me. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Like the moon, it will be firmly established forever As a faithful witness in the skies.” (<em>Selah</em>)</p><p></p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <strong>(Gen. 1:16)</strong></a> And God went on to make the two great luminaries, the greater luminary for dominating the day and the lesser luminary for dominating the night, and also the stars.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <strong>(Dan. 7:14)</strong></a> And to him there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him. His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w06 7/15 p. 13 par. 4 Highlights From Books Three and Four of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p39"><span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102"><strong>90:10,</strong></a><span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103"> <strong>12</strong></a><strong>. </strong>Since life is short, we should “count our days.” How? By bringing “a heart of wisdom in,” or by exercising wisdom so that our remaining days are not wasted but are spent in a way that pleases Jehovah. This requires that we set spiritual priorities and use our time wisely.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104">Ephesians 5:15, 16;</a><span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105"> Philippians 1:10</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 90:10)</strong> The span of our life is 70 years, Or 80 if one is especially strong.* But they are filled with trouble and sorrow; They quickly pass by, and away we fly.</p><p></p><p>Or “because of special mightiness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 90:12)</strong> Teach us how to count our days So that we may acquire a heart of wisdom.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 5:15, 16)</strong> So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>making the best use of your time,* because the days are wicked.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “buying out the appointed time.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Phil. 1:10)</strong> that you may make sure of the more important things, so that you may be flawless and not stumbling others up to the day of Christ;</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***w01 11/15 p. 13 Jehovah Shows Us How to Count Our Days***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p24"><sup>19 </sup>The psalmist’s words are a prayer that Jehovah teach his people how to exercise wisdom in valuing and using their remaining days in a God-approved way. A life expectancy of 70 years holds out hope of some 25,500 days. Regardless of our age, though, ‘we do not know what our life will be tomorrow, for we are a mist appearing for a little while and then disappearing.’ (<span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106">James 4:13-15</a>) Since ‘time and unforeseen occurrence befall us all,’ we cannot say how much longer we will live. Let us therefore pray for wisdom to deal with trials, to treat others properly, and to do our best in Jehovah’s service right now<wbr />—today! (<span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107">Ecclesiastes 9:11;</a><span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108"> James 1:5-8</a>) Jehovah guides us by means of his Word, his spirit, and his organization. (<span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109">Matthew 24:45-47;</a><span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110"> 1 Corinthians 2:10;</a><span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111"> 2 Timothy 3:16, 17</a>) The exercise of wisdom moves us to ‘seek first God’s Kingdom’ and to use our days in a way that brings glory to Jehovah and makes his heart rejoice. (<span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112">Matthew 6:25-33;</a><span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113"> Proverbs 27:11</a>) Worshiping him wholeheartedly will not remove all our problems, of course, but it certainly results in great joy.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:13-15)</strong> Come, now, you who say: “Today or tomorrow we will travel to this city and will spend a year there, and we will do business and make some profit,” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>whereas you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow. For you are a mist that appears for a little while and then disappears. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Instead, you should say: “If Jehovah* wills, we will live and do this or that.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 9:11)</strong> I have seen something further under the sun, that the swift do not always win the race, nor do the mighty win the battle, nor do the wise always have the food, nor do the intelligent always have the riches, nor do those with knowledge always have success, because time and unexpected events* overtake them all.</p><p></p><p>Or “unforeseen occurrence.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 1:5-8)</strong> So if any one of you is lacking in wisdom, let him keep asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching,* and it will be given him. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>But let him keep asking in faith, not doubting at all, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and blown about. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In fact, that man should not expect to receive anything from Jehovah;* <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>he is an indecisive man, unsteady in all his ways.</p><p></p><p>Or “finding fault.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 2:10)</strong> For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16, 17)</strong> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:25-33)</strong> “On this account I say to you: Stop being anxious about your lives* as to what you will eat or what you will drink, or about your bodies as to what you will wear. Does not life* mean more than food and the body than clothing? <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Observe intently the birds of heaven; they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses, yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not worth more than they are? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit* to his life span? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Also, why are you anxious about clothing? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not toil, nor do they spin; <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>but I tell you that not even Solʹo·mon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Now if this is how God clothes the vegetation of the field that is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much rather clothe you, you with little faith? <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>So never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to wear?’ <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. Your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>“Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “the soul.”</p><p>See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***snnw song 141 Searching for Friends of Peace***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 141</p>
<h1><strong>Searching for Friends of Peace</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">           Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">           Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource114"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation114">Luke 10:6</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             Jesus commanded: ‘Let the truth be heard.’</p>
<p class="p8">In summer heat, on dusty roads,</p>
<p class="p9">He let all hear Jehovah’s word.</p>
<p class="p10">He loved God’s sheep and called to ev’ryone.</p>
<p class="p11">He searched the land</p>
<p class="p12">from the sunrise ‘til the day was done.</p>
<p class="p13">From door to door and in the street,</p>
<p class="p14">We share with ev’ryone we meet</p>
<p class="p15">The news that soon man’s troubles</p>
<p class="p16">all will be gone.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">Searching the world</p>
<p class="p19">For friends of peace in ev’ry nation,</p>
<p class="p20">Searching to find</p>
<p class="p21">A heart inclined toward salvation,</p>
<p class="p22">Wanting to leave</p>
<p class="p23">No stone unturned.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p24">             Time waits for no one, so the search goes on.</p>
<p class="p25">A million hearts, a million lives,</p>
<p class="p26">We give our all to save just one.</p>
<p class="p27">Love is the force that makes us call again.</p>
<p class="p28">A wounded heart can be healed,</p>
<p class="p29">and broken lives can mend.</p>
<p class="p30">We search the towns and city squares,</p>
<p class="p31">And when we find someone who cares,</p>
<p class="p32">The joy we feel inspires us to go on.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p33">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p34">Searching the world</p>
<p class="p35">For friends of peace in ev’ry nation,</p>
<p class="p36">Searching to find</p>
<p class="p37">A heart inclined toward salvation,</p>
<p class="p38">Wanting to leave</p>
<p class="p39">No stone unturned.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p40">(See also <span id="citationsource115"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation115">Isa. 52:7;</a><span id="citationsource116"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation116"> Matt. 28:19, 20;</a><span id="citationsource117"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation117"> Luke 8:1;</a><span id="citationsource118"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation118"> Rom. 10:10</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation114"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource114">^ <strong>(Luke 10:6)</strong></a> And if a friend of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him. But if there is not, it will return to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation115"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource115">^ <strong>(Isa. 52:7)</strong></a> How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news, The one proclaiming peace, The one bringing good news of something better, The one proclaiming salvation, The one saying to Zion: “Your God has become King!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation116"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource116">^ <strong>(Matt. 28:19, 20)</strong></a> Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”*</p><p></p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation117"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource117">^ <strong>(Luke 8:1)</strong></a> Shortly afterward he traveled from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the Kingdom of God. And the Twelve were with him,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation118"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource118">^ <strong>(Rom. 10:10)</strong></a> For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***ia pp. 180-183 He Fought Against Fear and Doubt***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1-3. </strong>What had Peter witnessed during an eventful day, and what kind of night was he experiencing?</p>
<p class="p3">PETER strained against the oar and peered into the night. Was that a faint glow he saw on the eastern horizon, a sign of dawn at last? The muscles of his back and shoulders burned from long hours of rowing. The wind that whipped his hair about had churned the Sea of Galilee into a rage. Wave after wave crashed against the prow of the fishing boat, soaking him with cold spray. He rowed on.</p>
<p class="p4"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Somewhere back there on shore, Peter and his companions had left Jesus by himself. That day, they had seen Jesus feed a hungry crowd of thousands with just a few loaves and fish. The people responded by seeking to make Jesus king, but he wanted no part of politics. He was also determined to keep his followers from cultivating such ambitions. Evading the crowds, he compelled his disciples to board the boat and head for the opposite shore while he went up into the mountain alone to pray.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource119"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation119">Mark 6:35-45</a>; <strong><em>read </em></strong><span id="citationsource120"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation120"><strong><em>John 6:14-17</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="p5"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The moon, nearly full, had been high overhead when the disciples set out; now it was sinking slowly toward the western horizon. Yet, they had managed to travel only a few miles. The exertion and the constant roar of the wind and the waves made conversation difficult. Likely, Peter was alone with his thoughts.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p51">In two years, Peter had learned a great deal from Jesus, but he still had much to learn</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"> <strong>4. </strong>What struggles make Peter’s example an outstanding one for us to imitate?</p>
<p class="p6"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>How much there was to think about! Peter had first met Jesus of Nazareth over two eventful years earlier. He had learned a great deal, but he still had much to learn. His willingness to do so<wbr />—to struggle against such obstacles as doubt and fear—<wbr />make him an outstanding example for us to imitate. Let us see why.</p>
<h2><strong>“We Have Found the Messiah”!</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>5, 6. </strong>What kind of life did Peter lead?</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Peter would never forget the day he met Jesus. His brother, Andrew, had first brought him the astounding news: “We have found the Messiah.” With those words, Peter’s life began to change. It would never again be the same.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource121"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation121">John 1:41</a>.</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Peter lived in Capernaum, a city on the northern shore of a freshwater lake called the Sea of Galilee. He and Andrew were partners with James and John, the sons of Zebedee, in a fishing business. Living with Peter were not only his wife but also his mother-in-law and his brother, Andrew. To support such a household by fishing surely required hard work, energy, and resourcefulness. We can imagine the countless long nights of labor<wbr />—the men letting out the dragnets between two boats and hauling aboard whatever catch the lake afforded. We can also picture toilsome daylight hours as the fish were sorted and sold, the nets mended and cleaned.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>7. </strong>What did Peter come to hear about Jesus, and why was the news thrilling?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Andrew, the Bible tells us, was a disciple of John the Baptist. Peter surely listened to his brother’s reports about John’s message with intense interest. One day, Andrew saw John point out Jesus of Nazareth and say: “See, the Lamb of God!” Andrew immediately became a follower of Jesus and eagerly told Peter this thrilling news: The Messiah had arrived! (<span id="citationsource122"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation122">John 1:35-40</a>) After the rebellion in Eden some 4,000 years earlier, Jehovah God had promised that a special individual would come to provide real hope for mankind. (<span id="citationsource123"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation123">Gen. 3:15</a>) Andrew had met this very Rescuer, the Messiah himself! Peter hurried off to meet Jesus as well.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>8. </strong>What was the meaning of the name Jesus bestowed on Peter, and why do some still question that choice of a name?</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Until that day, Peter was known by the name Simon, or Simeon. But Jesus looked at him and said: “‘You are Simon the son of John; you will be called Cephas’ (which is translated Peter).” (<span id="citationsource124"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation124">John 1:42</a>) “Cephas” is a common noun meaning “stone,” or “rock.” Evidently, Jesus’ words were prophetic. He foresaw that Peter would become like a rock<wbr />—a stable, sturdy, and reliable influence among Christ’s followers. Did Peter see himself that way? It seems doubtful. Even some modern-day readers of the Gospel accounts see little that is rocklike in Peter. Some have suggested that his character as revealed in the Bible record seems to be unsteady, inconstant, vacillating.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>9. </strong>What do Jehovah and his Son look for, and why, do you think, should we trust their point of view?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Peter did have his faults. Jesus was not blind to those. But Jesus, like his Father, Jehovah, was always looking for the good in people. Jesus saw much potential in Peter, and He sought to help him build on those good qualities. Jehovah and his Son look for the good in us today too. We may have a hard time believing that there is much good in us for them to find. However, we need to trust their viewpoint and prove ourselves willing to be trained and molded, as Peter was.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource125"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation125"><strong><em>1 John 3:19, 20</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<h2><strong>“Stop Being Afraid”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>10. </strong>What did Peter likely witness, yet to what did he return?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Peter likely accompanied Jesus on part of the preaching tour that ensued. He may thus have seen Jesus perform his first miracle, that of turning water into wine at the wedding feast in Cana. More important, he heard Jesus’ marvelous and hope-filled message about the Kingdom of God. Still, he tore himself away and returned to his fishing business. Some months later, though, Peter was again face-to-face with Jesus<wbr />—and this time Jesus invited Peter to follow him full-time as a way of life.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>11, 12. </strong>(a) What kind of night’s work had Peter endured? (b) Listening to Jesus likely brought what questions to Peter’s mind?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Peter had just endured a discouraging night’s work. Again and again, the fishermen had let down their nets, only to haul them in empty. Peter surely brought all his experience and ingenuity to bear on the problem, trying various spots in the lake to find where the fish were feeding. No doubt, there were times when he, like so many fishermen, wished he could peer right into the murky waters to find the schools of fish or somehow will them into his nets. Of course, such thoughts could only deepen his frustration. This was no pleasure sport for Peter; people depended on him to catch fish. Finally, he came ashore empty-handed. The nets had to be cleaned. He was thus busily engaged when Jesus approached.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p53">Peter never tired of hearing Jesus develop the central theme of his preaching<wbr />—the Kingdom of God</p>
</div>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>A crowd was pressing in on Jesus, eagerly taking in his every word. Hemmed in by them, Jesus got into Peter’s boat and asked him to pull away a bit from land. With his voice carrying clearly over the water, Jesus taught the crowd. Peter listened with rapt attention, as did those ashore. He never tired of hearing Jesus develop the central theme of his preaching<wbr />—the Kingdom of God. What a privilege it would be to help the Christ spread this message of hope throughout the land! But would that be practical? How would Peter feed his family? Perhaps Peter thought again of the long and fruitless night behind him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource126"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation126">Luke 5:1-3</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation119"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource119">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Mark 6:35-45)</strong> By now the hour had grown late, and his disciples came up to him and said: “This place is isolated, and the hour is already late. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Send them away, so that they may go off into the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat.” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He replied to them: “You give them something to eat.” At this they said to him: “Should we go off and buy 200 de·narʹi·i* worth of bread and give it to the people to eat?” <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>He said to them: “How many loaves do you have? Go see!” After finding out, they said: “Five, besides two fish.” <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>And he instructed all the people to recline in groups on the green grass. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>So they reclined in groups of 100 and of 50. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Taking now the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and said a blessing. Then he broke the loaves up and began giving them to the disciples to place them before the people, and he divided up the two fish for all. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>So they all ate and were satisfied, <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>and they took up 12 baskets full of fragments, aside from the fish. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>Those who ate the loaves were 5,000 men. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>Then, without delay, he made his disciples board the boat and go on ahead to the opposite shore toward Beth·saʹi·da, while he himself sent the crowd away.</p><p></p><p>See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation120"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource120">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(John 6:14-17)</strong> When the people saw the sign he performed, they began to say: “This really is the Prophet who was to come into the world.” <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Then Jesus, knowing that they were about to come and seize him to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain all alone. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>and boarding a boat, they set out across the sea for Ca·perʹna·um. By now it had grown dark, and Jesus had not yet come to them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation121"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource121">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 1:41)</strong> He first found his own brother Simon and said to him: “We have found the Mes·siʹah” (which means, when translated, “Christ”),</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation122"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource122">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(John 1:35-40)</strong> Again the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples, <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>and as he looked at Jesus walking, he said: “See, the Lamb of God!” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Then Jesus turned, and seeing them following, he said to them: “What are you looking for?” They said to him: “Rabbi (which means, when translated, “Teacher”), where are you staying?” <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>He said to them: “Come, and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day; it was about the tenth hour.* <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was one of the two who heard what John said and followed Jesus.</p><p></p><p>That is, about 4:00 p.m.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation123"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource123">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:15)</strong> And I will put enmity* between you and the woman and between your offspring* and her offspring.* He will crush* your head, and you will strike* him in the heel.”</p><p></p><p>Or “hostility.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “bruise; strike.”</p><p>Or “bruise; crush.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation124"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource124">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(John 1:42)</strong> and he led him to Jesus. When Jesus looked at him, he said: “You are Simon, the son of John; you will be called Ceʹphas” (which is translated “Peter”).</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation125"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource125">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(1 John 3:19, 20)</strong> By this we will know that we originate with the truth, and we will assure* our hearts before him <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>regarding whatever our hearts may condemn us in, because God is greater than our hearts and knows all things.</p><p></p><p>Or “persuade; convince.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation126"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource126">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:1-3)</strong> On one occasion when the crowd was pressing in on him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gen·nesʹa·ret.* <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and he began teaching the crowds from the boat.</p><p></p><p>That is, the Sea of Galilee.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016282.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***snnw song 137 Grant Us Boldness***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 137</p>
<h1><strong>Grant Us Boldness</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">           Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">           Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource127"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation127">Acts 4:29</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             As we tell about the Kingdom,</p>
<p class="p8">As we witness for your name,</p>
<p class="p9">There are many who oppose us</p>
<p class="p10">And who try to bring us shame.</p>
<p class="p11">But instead of fearing men,</p>
<p class="p12">It’s really you we must obey.</p>
<p class="p13">So we beg you now for your spirit;</p>
<p class="p14">O Jehovah, hear what we pray.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p15">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p16">Grant us boldness as we witness;</p>
<p class="p17">Help us overcome our fear.</p>
<p class="p18">Give us confidence and courage</p>
<p class="p19">So that all the world may hear.</p>
<p class="p20">Armageddon draws ever near,</p>
<p class="p21">But until that great day is here,</p>
<p class="p22">Grant us boldness as we witness.</p>
<p class="p23">This is our prayer.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p24">             Even though we may be fearful,</p>
<p class="p25">You remember we are dust.</p>
<p class="p26">Your assurance to support us</p>
<p class="p27">Is a promise we can trust.</p>
<p class="p28">Give attention to the threats</p>
<p class="p29">Of those who persecute and blame.</p>
<p class="p30">May you help us all to continue</p>
<p class="p31">As we boldly speak in your name.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p32">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p33">Grant us boldness as we witness;</p>
<p class="p34">Help us overcome our fear.</p>
<p class="p35">Give us confidence and courage</p>
<p class="p36">So that all the world may hear.</p>
<p class="p37">Armageddon draws ever near,</p>
<p class="p38">But until that great day is here,</p>
<p class="p39">Grant us boldness as we witness.</p>
<p class="p40">This is our prayer.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p41">(See also <span id="citationsource128"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation128">1 Thess. 2:2;</a><span id="citationsource129"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation129"> Heb. 10:35</a><strong>.</strong>)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation127"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource127">^ <strong>(Acts 4:29)</strong></a> And now, Jehovah,* give attention to their threats, and grant to your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness,</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation128"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource128">^ <strong>(1 Thess. 2:2)</strong></a> For although we had first suffered and been insolently treated in Phi·lipʹpi, as you know, we mustered up boldness* by means of our God to tell you the good news of God in the face of much opposition.*</p><p></p><p>Or “courage.”</p><p>Or possibly, “amid much struggling.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation129"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource129">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:35)</strong></a> Therefore, do not throw away your boldness,* which will be richly rewarded.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “freeness of speech.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
