<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 “Give Thanks to Jehovah”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016290.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 106:1-109:31)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Praise Jah!* Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty acts Or proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds?  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Happy are those who act with justice, Who always do what is right.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor* toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones, That I may rejoice along with your nation, That I may proudly praise* you along with your inheritance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>We have sinned just as our forefathers did; We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate* your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love, But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But he saved them for the sake of his name, To make his mightiness known.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; He led them through its depths as through a desert;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He saved them from the hand of their foe And reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The waters covered their adversaries; Not one of them survived.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then they had faith in his promise; They began to sing his praise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness; They tested God in the desert. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave them what they requested, But then struck them with disease that made them* waste away. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>In the camp they grew jealous of Moses And of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The earth then opened up and swallowed Daʹthan And covered those assembled with A·biʹram. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A fire blazed among their group; A flame consumed the wicked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>They made a calf in Hoʹreb And bowed down to a statue of metal;* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>They exchanged my glory For the representation of a grass-eating bull. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They forgot God their Savior, Who did great things in Egypt, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Wonderful works in the land of Ham, Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He was about to order their annihilation, But Moses his chosen one interceded with him* To avert his destructive anger. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Then they despised the desirable land; They had no faith in his promise. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>They kept grumbling in their tents; They did not listen to the voice of Jehovah. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>So he raised his hand in an oath concerning them That he would make them fall in the wilderness; <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>He would make their descendants fall among the nations, And he would scatter them throughout the lands. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Then they joined in worship of* Baʹal of Peʹor, And they ate sacrifices offered to the dead.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>They provoked Him by their actions, And a scourge broke out among them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened, The scourge was halted. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And it was counted to him as righteousness Through all generations forever. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>They provoked Him at the waters of Merʹi·bah,* And it went badly for Moses because of them. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>They embittered his spirit, And he spoke rashly with his lips. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>They did not annihilate the peoples, As Jehovah had commanded them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>But they mingled with the nations And adopted* their ways. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>They kept serving their idols, And these became a snare to them. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>They would sacrifice their sons And their daughters to demons. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>They kept spilling innocent blood, The blood of their own sons and daughters Whom they sacrificed to the idols of Caʹnaan; And the land was polluted with bloodshed. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>They became unclean by their works; They committed spiritual prostitution by their deeds. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>So the anger of Jehovah blazed against his people, And he grew to detest his inheritance. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>He repeatedly handed them over to the nations, So that those who hated them might rule over them. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Their enemies oppressed them, And they were subject to their power.* <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Many times he rescued them, But they would rebel and disobey, And they would be brought low for their error. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>But he would see their distress And hear their cry for help. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>For their sake he would remember his covenant, And he would feel pity,* moved by his great* loyal love. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He would cause them to be pitied By all who held them captive. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Save us, O Jehovah our God, And gather us from the nations So that we may give thanks to your holy name And exult in praising you.* <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praised Throughout all eternity.* And let all the people say, “Amen!”* Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>107 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let those reclaimed* by Jehovah say this, Those whom he reclaimed from the hand* of the adversary,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Whom he gathered together from the lands, From the east and from the west,* From the north and from the south.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They wandered about in the wilderness, in the desert; They did not find a way to a city where they could live.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They were hungry and thirsty; They were* faint from exhaustion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They kept crying out to Jehovah in their distress; He rescued them from their plight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He had them walk in the right way To come to a city where they could live.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For he has satisfied the thirsty* And filled the hungry* with good things. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Some were living in deepest darkness, Prisoners in affliction and in irons. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For they had rebelled against the word of God; They disrespected the counsel of the Most High. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So he humbled their hearts through hardship; They stumbled, and there was no one to help them. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They called to Jehovah for help in their distress; He saved them from their plight. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He brought them out of deepest darkness, And he tore off their shackles. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For he has broken down the doors of copper And cut through the bars of iron. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>They were foolish and suffered affliction On account of their transgressions and their errors. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They lost their appetite for* all food; They drew near the gates of death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>They would call to Jehovah for help in their distress; He would save them from their plight. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He would send his word and heal them And rescue them from the pits they were trapped in. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving And declare his works with a joyful cry. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Those who travel on the sea in ships, Who ply their trade over the vast waters, <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They have seen the works of Jehovah And his wonderful works in the deep; <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>How by his word a windstorm arises, Lifting up the waves of the sea. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>They rise up to the sky; They plunge down to the depths. Their courage* melts away because of the impending calamity. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>They reel and stagger like a drunken man, And all their skill proves useless. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Then they cry out to Jehovah in their distress, And he rescues them from their plight. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He calms the windstorm; The waves of the sea grow quiet. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>They rejoice when these grow still, And he leads them to their desired harbor. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Let people give thanks to Jehovah for his loyal love And for his wonderful works in behalf of the sons of men. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, And let them praise him in the council* of the elders. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He turns rivers into a desert And springs of water into parched ground, <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Fruitful land into salty wasteland, Because of the wickedness of those dwelling in it. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He turns the desert into reedy pools of water, And dry land into springs of water. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>He causes the hungry to dwell there, So that they may establish a city where they can live. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>They sow fields and plant vineyards That yield fruitful crops. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>He blesses them and they increase greatly; He does not let their cattle diminish. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>But again they become few and are humiliated Because of oppression, calamity, and grief. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>He pours out contempt upon nobles And makes them wander in trackless wastelands. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>But he protects* the poor from oppression And makes their families as numerous as a flock. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>The upright see this and rejoice; But all the unrighteous shut their mouths. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Whoever is wise will observe these things And will carefully consider Jehovah’s acts of loyal love. </p><p>A song. A melody of David. <strong>108 </strong>My heart is steadfast, O God. I will sing and make music with my whole being.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Do awake, O stringed instrument; you too, O harp. I will awaken the dawn.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I will praise you among the peoples, O Jehovah, And I will sing praises* to you among the nations.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For your loyal love is great, as high as the heavens, And your faithfulness, up to the skies.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Be exalted above the heavens, O God; May your glory be over all the earth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God has spoken in his holiness:* “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley* of Sucʹcoth.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet* for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies? <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries. </p><p>To the director. Of David. A melody. <strong>109 </strong>O God whom I praise, do not remain silent.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For the wicked and the deceitful open their mouths against me. They speak about me with lying tongues;  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They surround me with hateful words, And they attack me without cause.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They resist me in response to my love; But I continue to pray.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They repay me with bad for good And hatred for my love.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Appoint a wicked man over him; May a resister* stand at his right hand.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When he is judged, may he be found guilty;* May even his prayer be counted as a sin.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let his days be few; His office of oversight let someone else take.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Let his children* become fatherless, And his wife, a widow. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>May his children* become wandering beggars, Foraging for food from their ruined homes. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May his creditor seize* all that he has, And may strangers plunder his possessions. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>May no one extend kindness* to him, And may no one show favor to his fatherless children. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Let his descendants* be cut off; May their name be erased within a generation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Let the error of his forefathers be remembered by Jehovah, And may the sin of his mother not be erased. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May Jehovah always be mindful of what they have done; And may he cut off the memory of them from the earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For he did not remember to show kindness,* But he kept pursuing the oppressed, poor, and brokenhearted man To put him to death. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He loved to pronounce a curse, so that is what came upon him; He had no desire to bless, so he received no blessing. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He was clothed with curses as his garment. And they were poured into his body like water, Into his bones like oil. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his curses be like the clothing in which he wraps himself And like a belt he always wears. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This is the payment from Jehovah for the one who resists me And for those who speak evil things against me.* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But you, Jehovah the Sovereign Lord, Act in my behalf for the sake of your name. Rescue me, because your loyal love is good. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For I am helpless and poor, And my heart has been pierced within me. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>I am passing away like a fading shadow; I have been shaken off like a locust. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My knees give way from fasting; My body is thin, and I am wasting away.* <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I have become the object of their taunts. When they see me, they shake their heads. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Help me, O Jehovah my God; Save me by your loyal love. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>May they know that this is by your hand; That you, O Jehovah, have done it. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Let them pronounce a curse, but may you give a blessing. When they rise up against me, may they be put to shame, But let your servant rejoice. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Let those who resist me be clothed with humiliation; May they be wrapped in their shame as in a robe.* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>My mouth will fervently praise Jehovah; I will praise him in front of many people. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>For he will stand at the right hand of the poor To save him from those who condemn him.*</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “may boast about.”</p><p>Or “grasp the meaning of.”</p><p>Or “wilderness.”</p><p>Or “was left.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Or “molten statue.”</p><p>Lit., “stood in the breach before him.”</p><p>Or “attached themselves to.”</p><p>That is, sacrifices offered either to dead people or to lifeless gods.</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Or “learned.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Or “feel regret.”</p><p>Or “abundant.”</p><p>Or “exult in your praise.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “So be it!”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “repurchased.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Or “From sunrise and from sunset.”</p><p>Or “Their soul was.”</p><p>Or “the parched soul.”</p><p>Or “the hungry soul.”</p><p>Or “Their soul detested.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “seat.”</p><p>Or “puts on high,” that is, out of reach.</p><p>Lit., “even my glory.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in his holy place.”</p><p>Or “Low Plain.”</p><p>Lit., “stronghold.”</p><p>Or “an accuser.”</p><p>Or “wicked.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Or “May usurers lay out traps for.”</p><p>Or “loyal love.”</p><p>Or “posterity.”</p><p>Or “loyal love.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “My flesh has grown lean, without fatness (oil).”</p><p>Or “sleeveless coat.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
