<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 August 29–September 4</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016291.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 110:0-118:29)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Of David. A melody. <strong>110 </strong>Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand Until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.* In splendid holiness, from the womb of the dawn, You have your company of young men just like dewdrops.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind:* “You are a priest forever In the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will be at your right hand; He will crush kings on the day of his anger.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will execute judgment against* the nations; He will fill the land with dead bodies. He will crush the leader* of a vast land.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He* will drink from the stream along the road. Therefore, he will hold his head high. </p><p><strong>111 </strong>Praise Jah!* I will praise Jehovah with all my heart In the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The works of Jehovah are great; They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>His activity is glorious and splendid, And his righteousness endures forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He causes his wonderful works to be remembered. Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Food he gives to those fearing him. He remembers his covenant forever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He has revealed to his people his powerful works By giving them the inheritance of the nations.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The works of his hands are truth and justice; Trustworthy are all his orders.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They are always reliable,* now and forever; They are made in truth and righteousness.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He has given redemption to his people. He commanded that his covenant should last forever. His name is holy and awe-inspiring. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom. All those observing his orders* show good insight. His praise endures forever. </p><p><strong>112 </strong>Praise Jah!* Happy is the man who fears Jehovah, Who takes great pleasure in his commandments.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>His descendants will be mighty in the earth, And the generation of the upright will be blessed.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Wealth and riches are in his house, And his righteousness continues forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To the upright he shines like a light in the darkness. He is compassionate* and merciful and righteous.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>It goes well for the man who generously* lends. He conducts his affairs with justice.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will never be shaken. The righteous will be remembered forever.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He will not fear bad news. His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>His heart is unshakable;* he is not afraid; In the end he will look in triumph on his adversaries.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He has distributed widely;* he has given to the poor. His righteousness continues forever. His own strength* will be exalted with glory. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The wicked one will see and be upset. He will grind his teeth and melt away. The desires of the wicked will perish. </p><p><strong>113 </strong>Praise Jah!* Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah, Praise the name of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May Jehovah’s name be praised From now on and forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>From the rising of the sun to its setting, Let Jehovah’s name be praised.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah is high above all the nations; His glory is above the heavens.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Who is like Jehovah our God, The one who dwells* on high?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He stoops down to look on heaven and earth,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Raising the lowly from the dust. He lifts up the poor from the ash heap*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>In order to make him sit with nobles, With the nobles of his people.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He gives the barren woman a home As a happy mother with children.* Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>114 </strong>When Israel went out of Egypt, The house of Jacob from a people speaking a foreign language,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Judah became his sanctuary,* Israel, his dominion.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The sea saw it and fled; The Jordan turned back.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The mountains skipped about like rams, The hills, like lambs.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>What made you flee, O sea? Why, O Jordan, did you turn back?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Why did you skip about like rams, O mountains, Like lambs, O hills?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Tremble, O earth, because of the Lord, Because of the God of Jacob,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Who turns the rock into a reedy pool of water, The flinty rock into springs of water. </p><p><strong>115 </strong>Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us,* But to your name give glory Because of your loyal love and your faithfulness.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Our God is in the heavens; He does whatever he pleases.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Their idols are silver and gold, The work of human hands.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; Eyes, but they cannot see;  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Ears they have, but they cannot hear; A nose, but they cannot smell;  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Hands they have, but they cannot feel; Feet, but they cannot walk; They make no sound with their throat.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The people who make them will become just like them, As will all those who trust in them.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>O Israel, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Jehovah remembers us and will bless; He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will bless those who fear Jehovah, The small as well as the great. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah will give you an increase, To you and your children.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May you be blessed by Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>As for the heavens, they belong to Jehovah, But the earth he has given to the sons of men. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The dead do not praise Jah; Nor do any who go down into the silence of death.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But we will praise Jah From now on and forever. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>116 </strong>I love Jehovah Because he hears* my voice, my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For he inclines his ear* to me, And I will call on him as long as I live.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The ropes of death encircled me; The Grave had me in its grip.* I was overcome by distress and grief.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But I called on the name of Jehovah: “O Jehovah, rescue me!”*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and righteous; Our God is merciful.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding the inexperienced. I was brought low, and he saved me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let my soul* rest once again, For Jehovah has dealt kindly with me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You have rescued me* from death, My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>I had faith, for I spoke; I was greatly afflicted. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>As for me, I panicked and said: “Every man is a liar.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will take up the cup of salvation,* And I will call on the name of Jehovah. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Costly* in the eyes of Jehovah Is the death of his loyal ones. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I beg you, O Jehovah, For I am your servant. I am your servant, the son of your slave girl. You have freed me from my bonds. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanksgiving; I will call on the name of Jehovah. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>In the courtyards of the house of Jehovah, In your midst, O Jerusalem. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>117 </strong>Praise Jehovah, all you nations; Glorify him, all you peoples.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For his loyal love toward us is great; The faithfulness of Jehovah endures forever. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>118 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let Israel now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let those of the house of Aaron now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let those fearing Jehovah now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I called on Jah* in my distress; Jah answered and brought me into a place of safety.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah is on my side as my helper;* I will look in triumph on those who hate me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It is better to take refuge in Jehovah Than to trust in humans.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>It is better to take refuge in Jehovah Than to trust in princes. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All the nations surrounded me, But in the name of Jehovah, I warded them off. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They surrounded me, yes, I was completely surrounded, But in the name of Jehovah, I warded them off. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They surrounded me like bees, But they were extinguished as quickly as a fire among thorns. In the name of Jehovah, I warded them off. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I was pushed hard* to make me fall, But Jehovah helped me. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jah is my shelter and my strength, And he has become my salvation. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The sound of rejoicing and salvation* Is in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The right hand of Jehovah is exalting itself; The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I will not die, no, I will live, In order to declare the works of Jah. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jah disciplined me severely, But he did not hand me over to death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will enter them and praise Jah. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This is the gate of Jehovah. The righteous will enter through it. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>I will praise you, for you answered me And you became my salvation. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The stone that the builders rejected Has become the chief cornerstone.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>This has come from Jehovah; It is wonderful in our eyes. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>This is the day that Jehovah has made; We will be joyful and rejoice in it. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Jehovah, save us, please, we beg! Jehovah, grant us victory, please! <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Blessed is the one who comes in the name of Jehovah; We bless you from the house of Jehovah. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Jehovah is God; He gives us light. Join in the festival procession with branches in hand, Up to the horns of the altar. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>You are my God, and I will praise you; My God, I will exalt you. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “on the day your army mobilizes.”</p><p>Or “he will feel no regret.”</p><p>Or “among.”</p><p>Lit., “head.”</p><p>Or “of the entire earth.”</p><p>Referring to “my Lord” in vs. 1.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “well-founded.”</p><p>Lit., “them.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “graciously.”</p><p>Or “resolute; steady.”</p><p>Or “generously.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “sits enthroned.”</p><p>Or possibly, “garbage dump.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “holy place.”</p><p>Or “To us belongs nothing, O ­Jehovah, to us belongs nothing.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Lit., “into silence.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or possibly, “I love because Jehovah hears.”</p><p>Or “bends down to listen.”</p><p>Lit., “in my days.”</p><p>Lit., “The distresses of Sheol found me.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “grand salvation.”</p><p>Lit., “Precious.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “clans.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or possibly, “along with those helping me.”</p><p>Or possibly, “You pushed me hard.”</p><p>Or “victory.”</p><p>Lit., “the head of the corner.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016291.xhtml#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Pss. 110:1-111:10)</strong></a> <span id="citation9"></span>Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand Until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.* In splendid holiness, from the womb of the dawn, You have your company of young men just like dewdrops.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind:* “You are a priest forever In the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will be at your right hand; He will crush kings on the day of his anger.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will execute judgment against* the nations; He will fill the land with dead bodies. He will crush the leader* of a vast land.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He* will drink from the stream along the road. Therefore, he will hold his head high. </p><p><strong>111 </strong>Praise Jah!* I will praise Jehovah with all my heart In the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The works of Jehovah are great; They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>His activity is glorious and splendid, And his righteousness endures forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He causes his wonderful works to be remembered. Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Food he gives to those fearing him. He remembers his covenant forever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He has revealed to his people his powerful works By giving them the inheritance of the nations.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The works of his hands are truth and justice; Trustworthy are all his orders.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They are always reliable,* now and forever; They are made in truth and righteousness.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He has given redemption to his people. He commanded that his covenant should last forever. His name is holy and awe-inspiring. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom. All those observing his orders* show good insight. His praise endures forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “on the day your army mobilizes.”</p><p>Or “he will feel no regret.”</p><p>Or “among.”</p><p>Lit., “head.”</p><p>Or “of the entire earth.”</p><p>Referring to “my Lord” in vs. 1.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “well-founded.”</p><p>Lit., “them.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 61 What Sort of Person I Should Be***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 61</p>
<h1><strong>What Sort of Person I Should Be</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">2 Peter 3:11</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. How can I repay you, what gift can I give</p>
<p class="p5">To thank you, Jehovah, for the life that I live?</p>
<p class="p6">I look in my heart with your Word as my mirror;</p>
<p class="p7">The person I see, may you help me see clearer.</p>
<p class="p8">My life I have promised in service to you,</p>
<p class="p9">But not from mere duty will I do what I do.</p>
<p class="p10">Whole-souled and wholehearted I serve you by choice;</p>
<p class="p11">May I be one more who makes you rejoice.</p>
<p class="p12">2. Help me to examine, and help me to see</p>
<p class="p13">Just what sort of person you desire me to be.</p>
<p class="p14">Those loyal to you, you will loyally treasure;</p>
<p class="p15">May I be among those who bring your heart pleasure.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p16">(See also <span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Ps. 18:25;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 116:12;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> 119:37;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> Prov. 11:20</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 3:11)</strong></a> Since all these things are to be dissolved in this way, consider what sort of people you ought to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 18:25)</strong></a> With someone loyal you act in loyalty; With the blameless man you deal blamelessly;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:12)</strong></a> With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:37)</strong></a> Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Prov. 11:20)</strong></a> Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah, But those whose way is blameless bring pleasure to him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w87 3/15 p. 24 Happy God, Happy People!***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p10">◆ <span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">116:3</a><wbr />—What are “the ropes of death”?</p>
<p class="p11">It seemed as if death had so tightly bound the psalmist with unbreakable ropes that escape was impossible. Ropes tied tightly about limbs produce sharp pains, or pangs, and the Greek <em>Septuagint </em>version renders the Hebrew word for “ropes” as “pangs.” Hence, when Jesus Christ died, he was in the paralyzing grip, or pangs, of death. When Jehovah resurrected Jesus, therefore, He was “loosing the pangs of death.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Acts 2:24</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:3)</strong></a> The ropes of death encircled me; The Grave had me in its grip.* I was overcome by distress and grief.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “The distresses of Sheol found me.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Acts 2:24)</strong></a> But God resurrected him by releasing him from the pangs* of death, because it was not possible for him to be held fast by it.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “cords.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w09 7/15 p. 29 Accept Gratefully—Give Wholeheartedly***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p6">The psalmist wondered: “What shall I repay to Jehovah for all his benefits to me?” (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Ps. 116:12</a>) What benefits had he received? Jehovah had sustained him during a period of “distress and grief.” Moreover, Jehovah had “rescued [his] soul from death.” Now he wanted to “repay” Jehovah somehow. What could the psalmist do? He said: “My vows I shall pay to Jehovah.” (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Ps. 116:3, 4,</a><span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19"> 8,</a><span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20"> 10-14</a>) He resolved to keep all the solemn promises that he had made to Jehovah and to fulfill all his obligations to him.</p>
<p class="p7">You can do the same. How? By following a life course that at all times conforms to God’s laws and principles. Hence, make sure that your worship of Jehovah remains the most important thing in your life and that you let God’s spirit guide you in everything you do. (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Eccl. 12:13;</a><span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22"> Gal. 5:16-18</a>) In reality, of course, you can never fully repay Jehovah for all he has done for you. Still, it does ‘make Jehovah’s heart rejoice’ to see that you are wholeheartedly giving of yourself in his service. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Prov. 27:11</a>) What a wonderful privilege it is to give Jehovah pleasure in this way!</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:12)</strong></a> With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:3, 4)</strong></a> The ropes of death encircled me; The Grave had me in its grip.* I was overcome by distress and grief.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But I called on the name of Jehovah: “O Jehovah, rescue me!”*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “The distresses of Sheol found me.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:8)</strong></a> You have rescued me* from death, My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling.</p><p></p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:10-14)</strong></a> I had faith, for I spoke; I was greatly afflicted. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>As for me, I panicked and said: “Every man is a liar.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will take up the cup of salvation,* And I will call on the name of Jehovah. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people.</p><p></p><p>Or “grand salvation.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Eccl. 12:13)</strong></a> The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole obligation of man.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Gal. 5:16-18)</strong></a> But I say, Keep walking by spirit and you will carry out no fleshly desire at all. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For the flesh is against the spirit in its desire, and the spirit against the flesh; these are opposed to each other, so that you do not do the very things you want to do. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Furthermore, if you are being led by spirit, you are not under law.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong></a> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w98 12/1 p. 24 Standing at the Threshold of Greater Activity***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p11">Talks by three members of the Gilead faculty followed. Karl Adams spoke first, on the subject “What Will You Repay to Jehovah?” His talk was based on the 116th Psalm, which Jesus may have sung on the night before his death. (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Matthew 26:30</a>, footnote) What went through Jesus’ mind as he sang the words: “What shall I repay to Jehovah for all his benefits to me”? (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Psalm 116:12</a>) He may have been reflecting on the perfect body that Jehovah had prepared for him. (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Hebrews 10:5</a>) The following day, he would offer that body in sacrifice, proving the depth of his love. The students of the 105th class had tasted Jehovah’s goodness for the past five months. Now they would show their love for God by working hard in their missionary assignments.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Matt. 26:30)</strong></a> Finally, after singing praises,* they went out to the Mount of Olives.</p><p></p><p>Or “hymns; psalms.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:12)</strong></a> With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:5)</strong></a> So when he comes into the world, he says: “‘Sacrifice and offering you did not want, but you prepared a body for me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w10 4/15 p. 27 Are You Fully Following the Christ?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p43"><strong>What Will Help You to Keep Following the Christ?</strong></p>
<p class="p44">▪ Read God’s Word daily, and meditate on what you read.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Ps. 1:1-3;</a><span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28"> 1 Tim. 4:15</a>.</p>
<p class="p45">▪ Pray often for the support and guidance of God’s spirit.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Zech. 4:6;</a><span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30"> Luke 11:9,</a><span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31"> 13</a>.</p>
<p class="p46">▪ Associate with those who demonstrate heartfelt zeal for the ministry.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Prov. 13:20;</a><span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33"> Heb. 10:24, 25</a>.</p>
<p class="p47">▪ Appreciate the urgency of the times in which we are living.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Eph. 5:15, 16</a>.</p>
<p class="p48">▪ Be conscious of the serious consequences of ‘begging off.’<wbr />—<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Luke 9:59-62</a>.</p>
<p class="p49">▪ Reflect regularly on your dedication vow and the abundant blessings that result from serving Jehovah and following the Christ wholeheartedly.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Ps. 116:12-14;</a><span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37"> 133:3;</a><span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38"> Prov. 10:22</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Ps. 1:1-3)</strong></a> Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked And does not stand on the path of sinners And does not sit in the seat of scoffers.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone* day and night.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will be like a tree planted by streams of water, A tree that produces fruit in its season, The foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.</p><p></p><p>Or “he meditates on His law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 4:15)</strong></a> Ponder over* these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.</p><p></p><p>Or “Meditate on.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Zech. 4:6)</strong></a> He then said to me: “This is the word of Jehovah to Ze·rubʹba·bel: ‘“Not by a military force, nor by power, but by my spirit,” says Jehovah of armies.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(Luke 11:9)</strong></a> So I say to you, keep on asking, and it will be given you; keep on seeking, and you will find; keep on knocking, and it will be opened to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Luke 11:13)</strong></a> Therefore, if you, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <strong>(Prov. 13:20)</strong></a> The one walking with the wise will become wise, But the one who has dealings with the stupid will fare badly.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <strong>(Eph. 5:15, 16)</strong></a> So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>making the best use of your time,* because the days are wicked.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “buying out the appointed time.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Luke 9:59-62)</strong></a> Then he said to another: “Be my follower.” The man said: “Lord, permit me first to go and bury my father.” <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>But he said to him: “Let the dead bury their dead, but you go and declare abroad the Kingdom of God.” <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>And still another said: “I will follow you, Lord, but first permit me to say good-bye to those in my household.” <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>Jesus said to him: “No man who has put his hand to a plow and looks at the things behind is well-suited for the Kingdom of God.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:12-14)</strong></a> With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will take up the cup of salvation,* And I will call on the name of Jehovah. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people.</p><p></p><p>Or “grand salvation.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(Ps. 133:3)</strong></a> It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(Prov. 10:22)</strong></a> It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, And He adds no pain* with it.</p><p></p><p>Or “sorrow; hardship.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w14 10/15 p. 11 Have Unshakable Faith in the Kingdom***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>A COVENANT FILLS THE NEED FOR A PRIESTLY FUNCTION</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>15-17. </strong>According to the covenant for a priest like Melchizedek, in what additional capacity would the offspring serve, and why?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>While the Abrahamic covenant and the Davidic covenant make it certain that the offspring of the woman would have a kingly function, that role alone would not suffice to bring blessings to people of all nations. For them to be truly blessed, they would have to be freed from their sinful state and brought into Jehovah’s universal family. To accomplish this requires that the offspring also serve in a priestly capacity. The wise Creator provided for this by means of another legal arrangement, the <strong><em>covenant for a priest like Melchizedek.</em></strong></p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Jehovah revealed through King David that He would make a personal covenant with Jesus with a twofold objective: to have him “sit at [God’s] right hand” until he subdues his enemies and to be “a priest forever in the manner of Melchizedek.” <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39"><strong>Psalm 110:1, 2,</strong></a><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"> <strong>4</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Why “in the manner of Melchizedek”? Because long before any descendants of Abraham inherited the Promised Land, Melchizedek, the king of Salem, served as “priest of the Most High God.” (<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Heb. 7:1-3</a>) He was directly appointed by Jehovah to do so. He is the only one mentioned in the Hebrew Scriptures who served as both a king and a priest. Moreover, since he was without a recorded predecessor or successor, he can be called “a priest for all time,” or forever.</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jesus is directly appointed to be a priest by means of this personal covenant that Jehovah made with him, and he will remain “a priest forever in the manner of Melchizedek.” (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Heb. 5:4-6</a>) This clearly shows that Jehovah has legally bound himself to use the Messianic Kingdom to accomplish his original purpose concerning humans on earth.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 110:1, 2)</strong> Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand Until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 110:4)</strong> Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind:* “You are a priest forever In the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”</p><p></p><p>Or “he will feel no regret.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 7:1-3)</strong> For this Mel·chizʹe·dek, king of Saʹlem, priest of the Most High God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him, <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>and Abraham gave* him a tenth of everything. First, his name is translated “King of Righteousness,” and then also king of Saʹlem, that is, “King of Peace.” <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>In being fatherless, motherless, without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an end of life, but being made like the Son of God, he remains a priest for all time.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “apportioned.”</p><p>Or “perpetually.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 5:4-6)</strong> A man does not take this honor of his own accord, but he receives it only when he is called by God, just as Aaron was. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So, too, the Christ did not glorify himself by becoming a high priest, but was glorified by the One who said to him: “You are my son; today I have become your father.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>As he also says in another place, “You are a priest forever in the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 14 par. 1 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p12"><span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43"><strong>110:4</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—To what has Jehovah ‘sworn without feeling regret’? </strong>This oath is the covenant that Jehovah made with Jesus Christ to serve as King and High Priest.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Luke 22:29</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 110:4)</strong> Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind:* “You are a priest forever In the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”</p><p></p><p>Or “he will feel no regret.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:29)</strong> and I make a covenant with you, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w12 5/15 p. 22 Questions From Readers***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p4">When delivering a memorial talk for a Christian, it is not fitting to apply <span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Psalm 116:15</a> to the deceased person, even though he died as a loyal servant of Jehovah. Why? Because the psalmist’s statement has a broader significance. It means that God counts the death of <em>the entire group of his loyal ones </em>too costly for him to let it take place.<wbr />—See <span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Psalm 72:14;</a><span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47"> 116:8</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:15)</strong></a> Costly* in the eyes of Jehovah Is the death of his loyal ones.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Precious.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:14)</strong></a> From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Ps. 116:8)</strong></a> You have rescued me* from death, My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling.</p><p></p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***ll p. 16 Who Was Jesus?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Part 7</strong></p>
<p class="p2"><strong>Who Was Jesus?</strong></p>
<p class="p3">If we want to please Jehovah, we must listen to another important person. Long before creating Adam, Jehovah created a mighty spirit person in the heavens.</p>
<p class="p4">In time, Jehovah sent this one to be born in Bethlehem to a virgin named Mary. The child was given the name Jesus.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">John 6:38</a>.</p>
<p class="p5">As a man on earth, Jesus perfectly reflected God’s qualities. He was kind, loving, and approachable. Fearlessly, he taught others the truth about Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>Jehovah sent Jesus to earth. </strong><span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49"><strong>1 John 4:9</strong></a></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(John 6:38)</strong></a> for I have come down from heaven to do, not my own will, but the will of him who sent me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(1 John 4:9)</strong></a> By this the love of God was revealed in our case, that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world so that we might gain life through him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***ll p. 17 Who Was Jesus?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p7">Jesus also healed the sick and raised to life some who had died.</p>
<p class="p8">The religious leaders hated Jesus because he exposed their false teachings and their evil ways.</p>
<p class="p9">The religious leaders persuaded the Romans to beat Jesus and to kill him.</p>
<p class="p10"><strong>Jesus did good but was hated. </strong><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"><strong>1 Peter 2:21-24</strong></a></p>
<p class="p11">Why is it important to know about Jesus?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">John 17:3</a>.</p>
<p class="p12">What did Jesus do in heaven before he came to earth?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Colossians 1:15-17</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:21-24)</strong></a> In fact, to this course you were called, because even Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>He committed no sin, nor was deception found in his mouth. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>When he was being insulted,* he did not insult* in return. When he was suffering, he did not threaten, but he entrusted himself to the One who judges righteously. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He himself bore our sins in his own body on the stake,* so that we might die to* sins and live to righteousness. And “by his wounds you were healed.”</p><p></p><p>Or “reviled.”</p><p>Or “revile.”</p><p>Or “tree.”</p><p>Or “be finished with.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(John 17:3)</strong></a> This means everlasting life, their coming to know you,* the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.</p><p></p><p>Or “their taking in knowledge of you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(Col. 1:15-17)</strong></a> He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation; <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>because by means of him all other things were created in the heavens and on the earth, the things visible and the things invisible, whether they are thrones or lordships or governments or authorities. All other things have been created through him and for him. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Also, he is before all other things, and by means of him all other things were made to exist,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***bh pp. 179-181 Baptism and Your Relationship With God***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu">17. Why might some hold back from making a dedication to God?</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Some hold back from making a dedication to Jehovah because they are somewhat afraid of taking such a serious step. They may fear being accountable to God as a dedicated Christian. Being afraid that they may fail and disappoint Jehovah, they think that it is best not to make a dedication to him.</p>
<p class="qu">18. What can move you to make a dedication to Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>As you learn to love Jehovah, you will be moved to make a dedication to him and to do your best to live up to it. (<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Ecclesiastes 5:4</a>) After making a dedication, surely you will want to “walk worthily of Jehovah in order to please him fully.” (<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Colossians 1:10</a>) Because of your love for God, you will not think it is too hard to do his will. No doubt you will agree with the apostle John, who wrote: “This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">1 John 5:3</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">19. Why do you not need to fear making a dedication to God?</p>
<p class="p30"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>You do not have to be perfect to make a dedication to God. Jehovah knows your limitations and never expects you to do more than you are able to do. (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Psalm 103:14</a>) He wants you to succeed and will support and help you. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57"><strong>Isaiah 41:10</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>You can be sure that if you trust in Jehovah with all your heart, “he will make your paths straight.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Proverbs 3:5, 6</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 5:4)</strong> Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Col. 1:10)</strong> so as to walk worthily of Jehovah* in order to please him fully as you go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God;</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(1 John 5:3)</strong> For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:14)</strong> For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 41:10)</strong> Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not be anxious, for I am your God. I will fortify you, yes, I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand of righteousness.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***sn song 82 Imitate Christ’s Mildness***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 82</p>
<h1><strong>Imitate Christ’s Mildness</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">Matthew 11:28-30</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. The greatest of men was our Lord Jesus Christ;</p>
<p class="p5">By pride or ambition he was not enticed.</p>
<p class="p6">God’s purpose gave him the most prominent part;</p>
<p class="p7">Yet, always he proved himself lowly in heart.</p>
<p class="p8">2. All you who are toiling with burdensome cares,</p>
<p class="p9">He bids you come under the yoke that he bears.</p>
<p class="p10">Refreshment you’ll find as the Kingdom you seek.</p>
<p class="p11">Our Lord is mild-tempered; he favors the meek.</p>
<p class="p12">3. ‘All you are just brothers,’ our Lord Jesus said.</p>
<p class="p13">So never seek greatness; serve others instead.</p>
<p class="p14">The mild and the meek to our God have great worth;</p>
<p class="p15">He promises they will inherit the earth.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p16">(See also <span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Matt. 5:5;</a><span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61"> 23:8;</a><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62"> Prov. 3:34;</a><span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63"> Rom. 12:16</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Matt. 11:28-30)</strong></a> Come to me, all you who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh you. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and you will find refreshment for yourselves.* <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>For my yoke is kindly,* and my load is light.”</p><p></p><p>Or “your souls.”</p><p>Or “easy to bear.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Matt. 5:5)</strong></a> “Happy are the mild-tempered,* since they will inherit the earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “meek.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Matt. 23:8)</strong></a> But you, do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:34)</strong></a> For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Rom. 12:16)</strong></a> Have the same attitude toward others as toward yourselves; do not set your mind on lofty things,* but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become wise in your own eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “cultivate lofty ideas.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***ia pp. 196-200 He Learned Forgiveness From the Master***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>1. </strong>What may have been the worst moment of Peter’s life?</p>
<p class="p3">PETER would never forget that terrible moment when their eyes met. Did he see in Jesus’ gaze some hint of disappointment or reproach? We cannot venture so far; the inspired record says only that “the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.” (<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Luke 22:61</a>) But in that one glance, Peter saw the depth of his own failure. He realized that he had just done the very thing that Jesus had foretold, the one thing that Peter had insisted he would never do<wbr />—he had disowned his beloved Master. It was a low point for Peter, perhaps the worst moment of the worst day of his life.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>2. </strong>Peter needed to learn what lesson, and how may we benefit from his story?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All was not lost, though. Because Peter was a man of great faith, he still had an opportunity to recover from his mistakes and to learn one of Jesus’ greatest lessons. It had to do with forgiveness. Each of us needs to learn the same lesson, so let us follow Peter on this difficult journey.</p>
<h2><strong>A Man With Much to Learn</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>3, 4. </strong>(a) What question did Peter ask Jesus, and what might Peter have thought? (b) How did Jesus show that Peter had been influenced by the spirit prevalent in those days?</p>
<p class="p6"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>About six months earlier in his hometown of Capernaum, Peter approached Jesus and asked: “Lord, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?” Peter likely thought that he was being generous. After all, the religious leaders of the day taught that one had to forgive only three times! Jesus replied: “Not, Up to seven times, but, Up to seventy-seven times.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Matt. 18:21, 22</a>.</p>
<p class="p7"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Was Jesus suggesting that Peter keep a running tally of a transgressor’s actions? No; rather, by turning Peter’s 7 into a 77, he was saying that love does not allow us to set an arbitrary limit on forgiveness. (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">1 Cor. 13:4, 5</a>) Jesus showed that Peter had been influenced by a hard-hearted and unforgiving spirit that was prevalent in those days, one that meted out forgiveness as if by an accountant’s ledger. However, divine forgiveness is expansive, generous.<wbr /><em>—<strong>Read </strong></em><strong></strong><span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67"><strong><em>1 John 1:7-9</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>5. </strong>When might we learn the most about forgiveness?</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Peter did not argue with Jesus. But did Jesus’ lesson really reach his heart? Sometimes we learn the most about forgiveness when we realize how desperately we need it ourselves. So let us return to the events leading up to Jesus’ death. In those difficult hours, Peter gave his Master many things to forgive.</p>
<h2><strong>A Growing Need for Forgiveness</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>How did Peter respond as Jesus tried to teach the apostles about humility, yet how did Jesus treat him?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>It was a momentous evening<wbr />—the final night of Jesus’ earthly life. Jesus still had much to teach his apostles<wbr />—for instance, about humility. Jesus set an example by humbly washing their feet, a job normally assigned to the lowliest of servants. At first, Peter questioned Jesus’ actions. Then he refused the service. Next he insisted that Jesus wash not only his feet but also his hands and head! Jesus did not lose his patience but calmly explained the importance and meaning of what he was doing.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">John 13:1-17</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>7, 8. </strong>(a) In what ways did Peter further test Jesus’ patience? (b) How did Jesus continue to show a kind, forgiving spirit?</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Shortly thereafter, Peter further tested Jesus’ patience. The apostles fell to bickering over who of them was the greatest, and Peter surely played a part in that shameful display of human pride. Nonetheless, Jesus corrected them kindly and even commended them for what they had done well; they had shown faithfulness in sticking to their Master. He foretold, however, that they would all abandon him. Peter countered that he would stick with Jesus even in the face of death. Jesus prophesied that, on the contrary, Peter would deny his Master three times that very night before a cock crowed twice. Peter then not only contradicted Jesus but boasted that he would prove more faithful than all the other apostles!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Matt. 26:31-35;</a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> Mark 14:27-31;</a><span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71"> Luke 22:24-28;</a><span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"> John 13:36-38</a>.</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Was Jesus close to losing his patience with Peter? In fact, throughout this difficult time, Jesus kept looking for the good in his imperfect apostles. He knew that Peter would fail him, yet He said: “I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, when once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.” (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Luke 22:32</a>) Jesus thus expressed confidence in Peter’s spiritual recovery and his return to faithful service. What a kind, forgiving spirit!</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>9, 10. </strong>(a) In the garden of Gethsemane, what correction did Peter need? (b) Peter’s case may remind us of what?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Later, in the garden of Gethsemane, Peter needed correction more than once. Jesus asked him, as well as James and John, to keep on the watch while He prayed. Jesus was in emotional agony and in need of support, but Peter and the others fell asleep repeatedly. Jesus made this empathetic and forgiving observation: “The spirit, of course, is eager, but the flesh is weak.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Mark 14:32-41</a>.</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Before long, a mob arrived, bearing torches and armed with swords and clubs. Here was a time to act with caution and discretion. Yet, Peter rashly leaped into action, swinging a sword at the head of Malchus, a slave of the high priest, and lopping off one of the man’s ears. Jesus calmly corrected Peter, healed the wound, and explained a principle of nonviolence that guides His followers to this day. (<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Matt. 26:47-55;</a><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"> Luke 22:47-51;</a><span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77"> John 18:10, 11</a>) Peter had already given his Master much to forgive. His case may remind us that we all sin frequently. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78"><strong><em>James 3:2</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>)</strong> Who of us does not need divine forgiveness every single day? For Peter, though, the night was far from over. The worst lay ahead.</p>
<h2><strong>Peter’s Worst Failure</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>11, 12. </strong>(a) How did Peter show a measure of courage after Jesus’ arrest? (b) In what way did Peter’s example fall short of what he himself had professed?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jesus reasoned with the mob that if they were looking for him, they should let his apostles go. Peter watched helplessly as the mob bound Jesus. Then Peter fled, as did his fellow apostles.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Peter and John stopped in their flight, perhaps near the house of the former High Priest Annas, where Jesus was first taken for questioning. As Jesus was led from there, Peter and John followed but “at a good distance.” (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Matt. 26:58;</a><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"> John 18:12, 13</a>) Peter was no coward. It surely took a measure of courage to follow at all. The mob was armed, and Peter had already wounded one of them. Still, we do not here see in Peter’s example the kind of loyal love that he himself had professed<wbr />—a willingness to die by his Master’s side if need be.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Mark 14:31</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>13. </strong>What is the only way to follow Christ properly?</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Like Peter, many today seek to follow Christ “at a good distance”<wbr />—in such a way that no one else will notice. But as Peter himself later wrote, the only way to follow Christ properly is to stick as close to Him as we can, imitating His example in all things, regardless of the consequences.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82"><strong><em>1 Peter 2:21</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>14. </strong>How did Peter pass the nighttime hours during Jesus’ trial?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Peter’s cautious steps finally brought him up to the gate of one of Jerusalem’s most imposing mansions. It was the home of Caiaphas, the wealthy and powerful high priest. Such homes were usually built around a courtyard, with a gate in the front. Peter reached the gate and was refused entrance. John, who knew the high priest and was already inside, came and got the doorkeeper to admit Peter. It seems that Peter did not stick close to John; nor did he try to get inside the house to stand at his Master’s side. He stayed in the courtyard, where some slaves and servants were passing the chilly night hours in front of a bright fire, watching as the false witnesses against Jesus paraded in and out of the trial going on inside.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">Mark 14:54-57;</a><span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84"> John 18:15, 16,</a><span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85"> 18</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:61)</strong> At this the Lord turned and looked straight at Peter, and Peter recalled the statement of the Lord when he had said to him: “Before a rooster crows today, you will disown me three times.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 18:21, 22)</strong> Then Peter came and said to him: “Lord, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?” <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jesus said to him: “I say to you, not up to seven times, but up to 77 times.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 13:4, 5)</strong> Love is patient* and kind. Love is not jealous. It does not brag, does not get puffed up, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>does not behave indecently,* does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury.*</p><p></p><p>Or “long-suffering.”</p><p>Or “is not rude.”</p><p>Or “of wrongs.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(1 John 1:7-9)</strong> However, if we are walking in the light as he himself is in the light, we do have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>If we make the statement, “We have no sin,” we are misleading ourselves and the truth is not in us. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so as to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 13:1-17)</strong> Now because he knew before the festival of the Passover that his hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father, Jesus, having loved his own who were in the world, loved them to the end. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The evening meal was going on, and the Devil had already put it into the heart of Judas Is·carʹi·ot, the son of Simon, to betray him. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>So Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands and that he came from God and was going to God, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>got up from the evening meal and laid aside his outer garments. And taking a towel, he wrapped it around his waist.* <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>After that he put water into a basin and started to wash the feet of the disciples and to dry them off with the towel that was wrapped around him.* <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him: “Lord, are you washing my feet?” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jesus answered him: “What I am doing you do not understand now, but you will understand after these things.” <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Peter said to him: “You will certainly never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him: “Unless I wash you, you have no share with me.” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, wash not only my feet but also my hands and my head.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Jesus said to him: “Whoever has bathed does not need to have more than his feet washed, but is completely clean. And you men are clean, but not all of you.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For he knew the man who was betraying him. This is why he said: “Not all of you are clean.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>When, now, he had washed their feet and had put his outer garments on, he again reclined at the table and said to them: “Do you understand what I have done to you? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>You address me as ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and you are correct, for I am such. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Therefore, if I, the Lord and Teacher, washed your feet, you also should* wash the feet of one another. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>For I set the pattern for you, that just as I did to you, you should also do. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Most truly I say to you, a slave is not greater than his master, nor is one who is sent greater than the one who sent him. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>If you know these things, happy you are if you do them.</p><p></p><p>Or “girded himself.”</p><p>Or “with which he was girded.”</p><p>Or “you also are under obligation to.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 26:31-35)</strong> Then Jesus said to them: “All of you will be stumbled in connection with me on this night, for it is written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered about.’ <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into Galʹi·lee.” <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>But Peter, in response, said to him: “Although all the others are stumbled in connection with you, I will never be stumbled!” <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you, on this night, before a rooster crows, you will disown me three times.” <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Peter said to him: “Even if I should have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” All the other disciples also said the same thing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:27-31)</strong> And Jesus said to them: “You will all be stumbled, for it is written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered about.’ <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into Galʹi·lee.” <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>But Peter said to him: “Even if all the others are stumbled, I will not be.” <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>At that Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you that today, yes, on this very night, before a rooster crows twice, you will disown me three times.” <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>But he kept insisting: “If I have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” Also, all the others began to say the same thing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:24-28)</strong> However, there also arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them was considered to be the greatest. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But he said to them: “The kings of the nations lord it over them, and those having authority over them are called Benefactors. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>You, though, are not to be that way. But let the one who is the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the one taking the lead as the one ministering. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For which one is greater, the one dining* or the one serving?* Is it not the one dining?* But I am among you as the one serving.* <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“However, you are the ones who have stuck with me in my trials;</p><p></p><p>Or “reclining at the table.”</p><p>Or “ministering.”</p><p>Or “reclining at the table.”</p><p>Or “ministering.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(John 13:36-38)</strong> Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus answered: “Where I am going, you cannot follow me now, but you will follow later.” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Peter said to him: “Lord, why is it I cannot follow you now? I will surrender my life* in your behalf.” <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Jesus answered: “Will you surrender your life* in my behalf? Most truly I say to you, a rooster will by no means crow until you have disowned me three times.”</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:32)</strong> But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:32-41)</strong> So they came to a spot named Geth·semʹa·ne, and he said to his disciples: “Sit down here while I pray.” <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>And he took Peter and James and John along with him, and he began to feel deeply distressed* and to be greatly troubled. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>He said to them: “I am* deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on the watch.” <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>And going a little way forward, he fell to the ground and began praying that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>And he said: <em>“Abba,</em>* Father, all things are possible for you; remove this cup from me. Yet, not what I want, but what you want.” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>He returned and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: “Simon, are you sleeping? Did you not have the strength to keep on the watch for one hour? <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Keep on the watch and pray continually, so that you do not come into temptation. The spirit, of course, is eager,* but the flesh is weak.” <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>And he went away again and prayed, saying the same thing. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>And he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were weighed down, so they did not know what to answer him. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>And he returned the third time and said to them: “At such a time as this, you are sleeping and resting! It is enough! The hour has come! Look! The Son of man is being betrayed into the hands of sinners.</p><p></p><p>Or “feel stunned.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>An Aramaic word meaning “O Father!”</p><p>Or “willing.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 26:47-55)</strong> While he was still speaking, look! Judas, one of the Twelve, came and with him a large crowd with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>Now his betrayer had given them a sign, saying: “Whoever it is I kiss, he is the one; take him into custody.” <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>And going straight up to Jesus, he said: “Greetings, Rabbi!” and gave him a tender kiss. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>But Jesus said to him: “Fellow, for what purpose are you present?” Then they came forward and seized Jesus and took him into custody. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>But look! one of those with Jesus reached out his hand and drew his sword and struck the slave of the high priest, taking off his ear. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>Then Jesus said to him: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take up the sword will perish by the sword. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>Or do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father to supply me at this moment more than 12 legions of angels? <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>In that case, how would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must take place this way?” <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>In that hour Jesus said to the crowds: “Did you come out to arrest me with swords and clubs as against a robber? Day after day I used to sit in the temple teaching, and yet you did not take me into custody.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:47-51)</strong> While he was still speaking, look! a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading them, and he approached Jesus to kiss him. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>But Jesus said to him: “Judas, are you betraying the Son of man with a kiss?” <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>When those around him saw what was going to happen, they said: “Lord, should we strike with the sword?” <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>One of them even struck the slave of the high priest, taking off his right ear. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>But in reply Jesus said: “That is enough.” And he touched the ear and healed him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(John 18:10, 11)</strong> Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the slave of the high priest, cutting off his right ear. The name of the slave was Malchus. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jesus, however, said to Peter: “Put the sword into its sheath. Should I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 3:2)</strong> For we all stumble* many times. If anyone does not stumble in word, he is a perfect man, able to bridle also his whole body.</p><p></p><p>Or “make mistakes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 26:58)</strong> But Peter kept following him from a good distance, as far as the courtyard of the high priest, and after going inside, he sat with the house attendants to see the outcome.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(John 18:12, 13)</strong> Then the soldiers and the military commander and the officers of the Jews seized* Jesus and bound him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They led him first to Anʹnas, for he was the father-in-law of Caʹia·phas, who was high priest that year.</p><p></p><p>Or “arrested.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:31)</strong> But he kept insisting: “If I have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” Also, all the others began to say the same thing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 2:21)</strong> In fact, to this course you were called, because even Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:54-57)</strong> But Peter, from a good distance, followed him as far as into the courtyard of the high priest; and he was sitting together with the house attendants and warming himself before a bright fire. <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>Now the chief priests and the entire Sanʹhe·drin were looking for testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death, but they were not finding any. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>Many, indeed, were giving false witness against him, but their testimonies were not in agreement. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>Also, certain ones were standing up and bearing false witness against him, saying:</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(John 18:15, 16)</strong> Now Simon Peter, as well as another disciple, was following Jesus. That disciple was known to the high priest, and he went with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>but Peter was standing outside at the door.* So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought Peter in.</p><p></p><p>Or “entrance.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(John 18:18)</strong> Now the slaves and the officers were standing around a charcoal fire they had made, because it was cold and they were warming themselves. Peter also was standing with them and warming himself.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016291.xhtml#pcitationsource17">^ <span id="pcitation17"></span><strong>***snnw song 144 It Means Their Life***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 144</p>
<h1><strong>It Means Their Life</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Ezekiel 3:17-19</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             In this year of goodwill</p>
<p class="p8">by our God, all need to hear</p>
<p class="p9">That the day of his anger</p>
<p class="p10">will come, and it is near.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p11">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p12">It means their life, but not just theirs;</p>
<p class="p13">It means our own life as well.</p>
<p class="p14">It means their life if they obey,</p>
<p class="p15">So all the nations we must tell;</p>
<p class="p16">We must tell.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p17">             There’s a message to preach,</p>
<p class="p18">so we spread it all abroad.</p>
<p class="p19">We invite all to come and</p>
<p class="p20">be reconciled to God.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p21">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p22">It means their life, but not just theirs;</p>
<p class="p23">It means our own life as well.</p>
<p class="p24">It means their life if they obey,</p>
<p class="p25">So all the nations we must tell;</p>
<p class="p26">We must tell.</p>
</div>
<p class="p27">(BRIDGE)</p>
<p class="p28">It’s urgent, it’s important,</p>
<p class="p29">That people listen, learn, and live.</p>
<p class="p30">We tell them, and we teach them;</p>
<p class="p31">Life-giving truth we freely give.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p32">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p33">It means their life, but not just theirs;</p>
<p class="p34">It means our own life as well.</p>
<p class="p35">It means their life if they obey,</p>
<p class="p36">So all the nations we must tell;</p>
<p class="p37">We must tell.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p38">(See also <span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">2 Chron. 36:15;</a><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"> Isa. 61:2;</a><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"> Ezek. 33:6;</a><span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90"> 2 Thess. 1:8</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <strong>(Ezek. 3:17-19)</strong></a> “Son of man, I have appointed you as a watchman to the house of Israel; and when you hear a word from my mouth, you must warn them from me. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>When I say to someone wicked, ‘You will surely die,’ but you do not warn him, and you fail to speak in order to warn the wicked one to turn from his wicked course so that he may stay alive, he will die for his error because he is wicked, but I will ask his blood back from you.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But if you warn someone wicked and he does not turn back from his wickedness and from his wicked course, he will die for his error, but you will certainly save your own life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “I will hold you accountable for his blood.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <strong>(2 Chron. 36:15)</strong></a> Jehovah the God of their forefathers kept warning them by means of his messengers, warning them again and again, because he felt compassion for his people and for his dwelling place.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <strong>(Isa. 61:2)</strong></a> To proclaim the year of Jehovah’s goodwill* And the day of vengeance of our God, To comfort all who mourn,</p><p></p><p>Or “favor.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(Ezek. 33:6)</strong></a> “‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and he does not blow the horn and the people receive no warning and a sword comes and takes the life* of one of them, that person will die for his own error, but I will ask his blood back from the watchman.’*</p><p></p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “I will hold the watchman accountable for his blood.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <strong>(2 Thess. 1:8)</strong></a> in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
