<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 “With What Will I Repay Jehovah?”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016292.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 110:0-118:29)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Of David. A melody. <strong>110 </strong>Jehovah declared to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand Until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah will extend the scepter of your power out of Zion, saying: “Go subduing in the midst of your enemies.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.* In splendid holiness, from the womb of the dawn, You have your company of young men just like dewdrops.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn an oath, and he will not change his mind:* “You are a priest forever In the manner of Mel·chizʹe·dek!”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will be at your right hand; He will crush kings on the day of his anger.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will execute judgment against* the nations; He will fill the land with dead bodies. He will crush the leader* of a vast land.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He* will drink from the stream along the road. Therefore, he will hold his head high. </p><p><strong>111 </strong>Praise Jah!* I will praise Jehovah with all my heart In the assembled group of upright ones and in the congregation.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The works of Jehovah are great; They are studied by all those finding pleasure in them.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>His activity is glorious and splendid, And his righteousness endures forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He causes his wonderful works to be remembered. Jehovah is compassionate* and merciful.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Food he gives to those fearing him. He remembers his covenant forever.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He has revealed to his people his powerful works By giving them the inheritance of the nations.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The works of his hands are truth and justice; Trustworthy are all his orders.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They are always reliable,* now and forever; They are made in truth and righteousness.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He has given redemption to his people. He commanded that his covenant should last forever. His name is holy and awe-inspiring. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom. All those observing his orders* show good insight. His praise endures forever. </p><p><strong>112 </strong>Praise Jah!* Happy is the man who fears Jehovah, Who takes great pleasure in his commandments.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>His descendants will be mighty in the earth, And the generation of the upright will be blessed.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Wealth and riches are in his house, And his righteousness continues forever.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To the upright he shines like a light in the darkness. He is compassionate* and merciful and righteous.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>It goes well for the man who generously* lends. He conducts his affairs with justice.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will never be shaken. The righteous will be remembered forever.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He will not fear bad news. His heart is steadfast, trusting in Jehovah.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>His heart is unshakable;* he is not afraid; In the end he will look in triumph on his adversaries.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He has distributed widely;* he has given to the poor. His righteousness continues forever. His own strength* will be exalted with glory. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The wicked one will see and be upset. He will grind his teeth and melt away. The desires of the wicked will perish. </p><p><strong>113 </strong>Praise Jah!* Offer praise, you servants of Jehovah, Praise the name of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May Jehovah’s name be praised From now on and forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>From the rising of the sun to its setting, Let Jehovah’s name be praised.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah is high above all the nations; His glory is above the heavens.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Who is like Jehovah our God, The one who dwells* on high?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He stoops down to look on heaven and earth,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Raising the lowly from the dust. He lifts up the poor from the ash heap*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>In order to make him sit with nobles, With the nobles of his people.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He gives the barren woman a home As a happy mother with children.* Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>114 </strong>When Israel went out of Egypt, The house of Jacob from a people speaking a foreign language,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Judah became his sanctuary,* Israel, his dominion.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The sea saw it and fled; The Jordan turned back.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The mountains skipped about like rams, The hills, like lambs.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>What made you flee, O sea? Why, O Jordan, did you turn back?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Why did you skip about like rams, O mountains, Like lambs, O hills?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Tremble, O earth, because of the Lord, Because of the God of Jacob,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Who turns the rock into a reedy pool of water, The flinty rock into springs of water. </p><p><strong>115 </strong>Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us,* But to your name give glory Because of your loyal love and your faithfulness.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Our God is in the heavens; He does whatever he pleases.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Their idols are silver and gold, The work of human hands.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A mouth they have, but they cannot speak; Eyes, but they cannot see;  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Ears they have, but they cannot hear; A nose, but they cannot smell;  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Hands they have, but they cannot feel; Feet, but they cannot walk; They make no sound with their throat.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The people who make them will become just like them, As will all those who trust in them.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>O Israel, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>O house of Aaron, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah —He is their help and their shield. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Jehovah remembers us and will bless; He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will bless those who fear Jehovah, The small as well as the great. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jehovah will give you an increase, To you and your children.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May you be blessed by Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>As for the heavens, they belong to Jehovah, But the earth he has given to the sons of men. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The dead do not praise Jah; Nor do any who go down into the silence of death.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But we will praise Jah From now on and forever. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>116 </strong>I love Jehovah Because he hears* my voice, my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For he inclines his ear* to me, And I will call on him as long as I live.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The ropes of death encircled me; The Grave had me in its grip.* I was overcome by distress and grief.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But I called on the name of Jehovah: “O Jehovah, rescue me!”*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is compassionate* and righteous; Our God is merciful.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding the inexperienced. I was brought low, and he saved me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let my soul* rest once again, For Jehovah has dealt kindly with me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You have rescued me* from death, My eye from tears, my foot from stumbling.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>I had faith, for I spoke; I was greatly afflicted. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>As for me, I panicked and said: “Every man is a liar.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>With what will I repay Jehovah For all the good he has done for me? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will take up the cup of salvation,* And I will call on the name of Jehovah. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Costly* in the eyes of Jehovah Is the death of his loyal ones. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I beg you, O Jehovah, For I am your servant. I am your servant, the son of your slave girl. You have freed me from my bonds. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I will offer to you the sacrifice of thanksgiving; I will call on the name of Jehovah. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>I will pay my vows to Jehovah In the presence of all his people, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>In the courtyards of the house of Jehovah, In your midst, O Jerusalem. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>117 </strong>Praise Jehovah, all you nations; Glorify him, all you peoples.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For his loyal love toward us is great; The faithfulness of Jehovah endures forever. Praise Jah!* </p><p><strong>118 </strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let Israel now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let those of the house of Aaron now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let those fearing Jehovah now say: “His loyal love endures forever.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I called on Jah* in my distress; Jah answered and brought me into a place of safety.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah is on my side as my helper;* I will look in triumph on those who hate me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It is better to take refuge in Jehovah Than to trust in humans.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>It is better to take refuge in Jehovah Than to trust in princes. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All the nations surrounded me, But in the name of Jehovah, I warded them off. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They surrounded me, yes, I was completely surrounded, But in the name of Jehovah, I warded them off. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They surrounded me like bees, But they were extinguished as quickly as a fire among thorns. In the name of Jehovah, I warded them off. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I was pushed hard* to make me fall, But Jehovah helped me. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jah is my shelter and my strength, And he has become my salvation. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The sound of rejoicing and salvation* Is in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The right hand of Jehovah is exalting itself; The right hand of Jehovah is demonstrating its power. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I will not die, no, I will live, In order to declare the works of Jah. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jah disciplined me severely, But he did not hand me over to death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will enter them and praise Jah. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This is the gate of Jehovah. The righteous will enter through it. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>I will praise you, for you answered me And you became my salvation. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The stone that the builders rejected Has become the chief cornerstone.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>This has come from Jehovah; It is wonderful in our eyes. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>This is the day that Jehovah has made; We will be joyful and rejoice in it. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Jehovah, save us, please, we beg! Jehovah, grant us victory, please! <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Blessed is the one who comes in the name of Jehovah; We bless you from the house of Jehovah. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Jehovah is God; He gives us light. Join in the festival procession with branches in hand, Up to the horns of the altar. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>You are my God, and I will praise you; My God, I will exalt you. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.</p><p></p><p>Or “on the day your army mobilizes.”</p><p>Or “he will feel no regret.”</p><p>Or “among.”</p><p>Lit., “head.”</p><p>Or “of the entire earth.”</p><p>Referring to “my Lord” in vs. 1.</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “well-founded.”</p><p>Lit., “them.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “graciously.”</p><p>Or “resolute; steady.”</p><p>Or “generously.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “sits enthroned.”</p><p>Or possibly, “garbage dump.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “holy place.”</p><p>Or “To us belongs nothing, O ­Jehovah, to us belongs nothing.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Lit., “into silence.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or possibly, “I love because Jehovah hears.”</p><p>Or “bends down to listen.”</p><p>Lit., “in my days.”</p><p>Lit., “The distresses of Sheol found me.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “grand salvation.”</p><p>Lit., “Precious.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “clans.”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or possibly, “along with those helping me.”</p><p>Or possibly, “You pushed me hard.”</p><p>Or “victory.”</p><p>Lit., “the head of the corner.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
