<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 5/16 How Do You Make Personal Decisions?</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016366.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 69 Make Me Know Your Ways***</strong></a><br />Song 69</p><p><strong>Make Me Know Your Ways</strong></p><p>(Psalm 25:4)</p><p>1. We’re gathered together Jehovah, our God,</p><p>Accepting your warm invitation.</p><p>Your Word is a lamp that lights up our roadway,</p><p>The source of divine education.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Teach me your ways, and make me understand;</p><p>Incline my ear to hear your wise command.</p><p>Cause me to walk in ways of truth and right,</p><p>And make your law my principal delight.</p><p>2. Unreachably high is your wisdom, O God;</p><p>Your judgments we find reassuring.</p><p>Your Word is a source of unending wonder;</p><p>Your sayings of truth are enduring.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Teach me your ways, and make me understand;</p><p>Incline my ear to hear your wise command.</p><p>Cause me to walk in ways of truth and right,</p><p>And make your law my principal delight.</p><p>(See also Ex. 33:13; Ps. 1:2; 119:27, 35, 73, 105.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016366.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 57 The Meditation of My Heart***</strong></a><br />Song 57</p><p><strong>The Meditation of My Heart</strong></p><p>(Psalm 19:14)</p><p>1. The meditation of my heart,</p><p>The thoughts I ponder through the day<wbr />—</p><p>May they be pleasing to you, Lord,</p><p>And keep me steadfast in your way.</p><p>When worries weigh upon my mind</p><p>And make me restless in the night,</p><p>Then may I meditate on you</p><p>And things I know to be upright.</p><p>2. Whatever things are chaste and true,</p><p>Whatever virtue there may be,</p><p>Whatever things well-spoken of<wbr />—</p><p>May thoughts of these bring peace to me.</p><p>How precious are your thoughts, O God!</p><p>Beyond all counting is their sum.</p><p>So may I ponder your own words,</p><p>Absorbed in them may I become.</p><p>(See also Ps. 49:3; 63:6; 139:17, 23; Phil. 4:7, 8; 1 Tim. 4:15.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
