<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 5/16 Settle Differences in a Spirit of Love</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016361.xhtml#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Gen. 33:1-11)</strong></a> <span id="citation41"></span>Now Jacob raised his eyes and saw Eʹsau coming, and 400 men were with him. So he divided the children among Leʹah, Rachel, and the two female servants. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>He put the female servants and their children in front, Leʹah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph behind them. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then he himself went ahead of them and bowed down to the earth seven times as he came near to his brother. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Eʹsau ran to meet him, and he embraced him and kissed him, and they burst into tears. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>When he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children, he said: “Who are these with you?” to which he said: “The children with whom God has favored your servant.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>At that the female servants came forward with their children and bowed down, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and Leʹah too came forward with her children, and they bowed down. Then Joseph came forward with Rachel, and they bowed down. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Eʹsau said: “What is the purpose of all this camp of travelers that I have met?” He replied: “In order to find favor in the eyes of my lord.” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then Eʹsau said: “I have a great many possessions, my brother. Keep what is yours.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>However, Jacob said: “No, please. If I have found favor in your eyes, you must take my gift from my hand, because I brought it so that I could see your face. And I have seen your face as though seeing God’s face, in that you received me with pleasure. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Take, please, the gift conveying my blessing that was brought to you, for God has favored me and I have everything I need.” And he continued to urge him, so that he took it.</p><p></p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016361.xhtml#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Gen. 45:1-15)</strong></a> <span id="citation42"></span>At this Joseph could no longer control himself before all his attendants. So he cried out: “Have everyone leave me!” No one else stayed with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Then he began to weep so loudly that the Egyptians heard it and Pharʹaoh’s house heard it. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Finally Joseph said to his brothers: “I am Joseph. Is my father still alive?” But his brothers were unable to answer him at all, because they were astonished on account of him. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>So Joseph said to his brothers: “Come close to me, please.” With that they came close to him. Then he said: “I am Joseph your brother, whom you sold into Egypt. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But now do not be upset and do not reproach one another because you sold me here; because God has sent me ahead of you for the preservation of life. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>This is the second year of the famine in the land, and there are yet five years in which there will be no plowing or harvest. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But God sent me ahead of you in order to preserve for you a remnant on the earth* and to keep you alive by a great deliverance. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>So, then, it was not you who sent me here, but it was the true God, in order to appoint me as chief adviser* to Pharʹaoh and lord for all his house and ruler over all the land of Egypt. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“Return quickly to my father, and you must say to him, ‘This is what your son Joseph has said: “God has appointed me lord over all Egypt. Come down to me. Do not delay. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You must dwell in the land of Goʹshen, where you will be near me—you, your sons, your grandsons, your flocks, your herds, and everything you have. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I will supply you with food there, for there are yet five years of famine. Otherwise, you and your house and everything you have will come to poverty.”’ <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You and my brother Benjamin can now see with your own eyes that I am really the one speaking to you. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>So you must tell my father about all my glory in Egypt and everything you have seen. Now hurry and bring my father down here.” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Then he embraced* his brother Benjamin and gave way to weeping, and Benjamin wept with his arms around his neck. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And he kissed all his brothers and wept over them, and after that his brothers spoke with him.</p><p></p><p>Or “in the land.”</p><p>Lit., “as father.”</p><p>Lit., “fell upon the neck of.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016361.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 39 Our Possession of Peace***</strong></a><br />Song 39</p><p><strong>Our Possession of Peace</strong></p><p>(John 14:27)</p><p>1. Praise Jehovah, God of peace,</p><p>God of unity.</p><p>He will make all wars to cease,</p><p>Bring in harmony.</p><p>Prince of Peace is Christ his Son,</p><p>Tender, calm, and kind.</p><p>When the fight for right he’s won,</p><p>Perfect peace we’ll find.</p><p>2. We have left off angry words,</p><p>Making quarrels cease.</p><p>We have made from spears and swords,</p><p>Implements of peace.</p><p>If this peace we want to keep,</p><p>Then we must forgive.</p><p>Peacefully as Jesus’ sheep,</p><p>May we learn and live.</p><p>3. As a fruit of righteousness,</p><p>Peace we all must bear,</p><p>Proof of wisdom from above,</p><p>Gained through heartfelt prayer.</p><p>We would recommend our way,</p><p>Show our peaceful care</p><p>Till the Kingdom’s perfect day</p><p>Brings peace ev’rywhere.</p><p>(See also Ps. 46:9; Isa. 2:4; Jas. 3:17, 18.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016361.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 77 Be Forgiving***</strong></a><br />Song 77</p><p><strong>Be Forgiving</strong></p><p>(Psalm 86:5)</p><p>1. Lovingly Jehovah</p><p>Made provision through his Son</p><p>For our sins to be forgiven</p><p>And for death to be undone.</p><p>If we truly are repentant,</p><p>His forgiveness we can claim</p><p>On the basis of Christ’s ransom,</p><p>Asking pardon in his name.</p><p>2. We receive such mercy</p><p>When we act like God above</p><p>And forgive each other freely,</p><p>Showing empathy and love.</p><p>Putting up with one another,</p><p>Putting hurtfulness away;</p><p>Showing honor to our brother,</p><p>Showing love’s surpassing way.</p><p>3. Mercy is a virtue</p><p>That we all should cultivate.</p><p>It will keep us from resentment,</p><p>From the bitterness of hate.</p><p>When we imitate Jehovah,</p><p>Who is unsurpassed in love,</p><p>We will truly be forgiving;</p><p>We will be like God above.</p><p>(See also Matt. 6:12; Eph. 4:32; Col. 3:13.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
