<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 5/16 “Go, . . . and Make Disciples of People of All the Nations”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016362.xhtml#citationsource9">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:1-11)</strong> <span id="citation9"></span>On one occasion when the crowd was pressing in on him and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gen·nesʹa·ret.* <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and he began teaching the crowds from the boat. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>When he stopped speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and let down your nets for a catch.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But in reply Simon said: “Instructor, we toiled all night and caught nothing, but at your word I will lower the nets.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Well, when they did this, they caught* a great number of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both boats, so that these began to sink. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For both he and those with him were overwhelmed with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>and the same was true of both James and John, Zebʹe·dee’s sons, who were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men* alive.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.</p><p></p><p>That is, the Sea of Galilee.</p><p>Lit., “enclosed.”</p><p>Or “people.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016362.xhtml#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 19:11-21)</strong> <span id="citation14"></span>I saw heaven opened, and look! a white horse. And the one seated on it is called Faithful and True, and he judges and carries on war in righteousness. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>His eyes are a fiery flame, and on his head are many diadems.* He has a name written that no one knows but he himself, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>and he is clothed with an outer garment stained* with blood, and he is called by the name The Word of God. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Also, the armies in heaven were following him on white horses, and they were clothed in white, clean, fine linen. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And out of his mouth protrudes a sharp, long sword with which to strike the nations, and he will shepherd them with a rod of iron. Moreover, he treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>On his outer garment, yes, on his thigh, he has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I saw also an angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice and said to all the birds that fly in midheaven:* “Come here, be gathered together to the great evening meal of God, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>so that you may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of military commanders and the flesh of strong men and the flesh of horses and of those seated on them, and the flesh of all, of freemen as well as of slaves and of small ones and great.” <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>And I saw the wild beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the one seated on the horse and against his army. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>And the wild beast was caught, and along with it the false prophet that performed in front of it the signs with which he misled those who received the mark of the wild beast and those who worship its image. While still alive, they both were hurled into the fiery lake that burns with sulfur. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But the rest were killed off with the long sword that proceeded out of the mouth of the one seated on the horse. And all the birds were filled with their flesh.</p><p></p><p>Or “royal headbands.”</p><p>Or possibly, “sprinkled.”</p><p>Or “in midair; overhead.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016362.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***snnw song 141 p. 6 Searching for Friends of Peace***</strong></a><br />Song 141</p><p><strong>Searching for Friends of Peace</strong></p><p><strong>Download:</strong></p><p>• Lyrics Only</p><p>• Lead Sheet</p><p>(Luke 10:6)</p><p>1. Jesus commanded: ‘Let the truth be heard.’</p><p>In summer heat, on dusty roads,</p><p>He let all hear Jehovah’s word.</p><p>He loved God’s sheep and called to ev’ryone.</p><p>He searched the land</p><p>from the sunrise ‘til the day was done.</p><p>From door to door and in the street,</p><p>We share with ev’ryone we meet</p><p>The news that soon man’s troubles</p><p>all will be gone.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Searching the world</p><p>For friends of peace in ev’ry nation,</p><p>Searching to find</p><p>A heart inclined toward salvation,</p><p>Wanting to leave</p><p>No stone unturned.</p><p>2. Time waits for no one, so the search goes on.</p><p>A million hearts, a million lives,</p><p>We give our all to save just one.</p><p>Love is the force that makes us call again.</p><p>A wounded heart can be healed,</p><p>and broken lives can mend.</p><p>We search the towns and city squares,</p><p>And when we find someone who cares,</p><p>The joy we feel inspires us to go on.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Searching the world</p><p>For friends of peace in ev’ry nation,</p><p>Searching to find</p><p>A heart inclined toward salvation,</p><p>Wanting to leave</p><p>No stone unturned.</p><p>(See also Isa. 52:7; Matt. 28:19, 20; Luke 8:1; Rom. 10:10.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016362.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 97 Forward, You Ministers of the Kingdom!***</strong></a><br />Song 97</p><p><strong>Forward, You Ministers of the Kingdom!</strong></p><p>(2 Timothy 4:5)</p><p>1. Go forward in preaching the Kingdom</p><p>To people in ev’ry land.</p><p>With love in your hearts for your neighbor,</p><p>Help meek ones to take their stand.</p><p>Our service to God is a priv’lege;</p><p>His word we are glad to proclaim.</p><p>Go out in the field and keep preaching;</p><p>Give witness to God’s holy name.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Forward, boldly preach the</p><p>Kingdom message ever far and wide.</p><p>Forward, faithful, loyally remaining</p><p>on Jehovah’s side.</p><p>2. True ministers keep pressing forward</p><p>With God’s prize of life in view.</p><p>We follow the steps of our Master</p><p>With hearts that have been made new.</p><p>The good news of God’s coming Kingdom</p><p>Is something that all need to hear.</p><p>We preach in the strength of Jehovah;</p><p>With him there is nothing to fear!</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Forward, boldly preach the</p><p>Kingdom message ever far and wide.</p><p>Forward, faithful, loyally remaining</p><p>on Jehovah’s side.</p><p>3. Together we press ever forward,</p><p>God’s remnant and other sheep.</p><p>The old and the young men and women</p><p>In step with the truth do keep.</p><p>Our service we hold to be sacred;</p><p>Our worship is never routine.</p><p>To God may we prove ever worthy</p><p>By conduct that’s holy and clean.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Forward, boldly preach the</p><p>Kingdom message ever far and wide.</p><p>Forward, faithful, loyally remaining</p><p>on Jehovah’s side.</p><p>(See also Ps. 23:4; Acts 4:29, 31; 1 Pet. 2:21.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
