<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Table of Contents</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/w16_68.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl" id="p1" data-pid="1"><span id="page2" class="pageNum" data-no="2" data-before-text="2"></span><strong>Table of Contents</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="groupTOC"><div class="groupStudySched"><h3 id="p2" data-pid="2"><strong>WEEK OF JUNE 27, 2016–JULY 3, 2016</strong></h3>
<p id="p3" data-pid="3" class="p3"> 3  <a href="2016361.xhtml"><strong>Settle Differences in a Spirit of Love</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxContent"><p id="p4" data-pid="4" class="p4">Because of our inherited imperfection, we are sure to face situations that cause ill feelings. This article shows how Bible principles can be applied in order to settle differences with others.</p>
</div>
<h3 id="p5" data-pid="5"><strong>WEEK OF JULY 4-10, 2016</strong></h3>
<p id="p6" data-pid="6" class="p6"> 8  <a href="2016362.xhtml"><strong>“Go, . . . and Make Disciples of People of All the Nations”</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxContent"><p id="p7" data-pid="7" class="p7">This article discusses evidence that Jehovah’s Witnesses are the only people on earth today who are fulfilling Jesus’ prophetic words found at <span id="citationsource1"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation1">Matthew 24:14</a>. It also explains what is involved in becoming “fishers of men.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource2"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation2">Matt. 4:19</a>.</p>
</div>
<h3 id="p8" data-pid="8"><strong>WEEK OF JULY 11-17, 2016</strong></h3>
<p id="p9" data-pid="9" class="p9">13  <a href="2016366.xhtml"><strong>How Do You Make Personal Decisions?</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxContent"><p id="p10" data-pid="10" class="p10">When you make personal decisions, do you simply do what feels right to you? Or do you ask others what they would do? This article explains why the best decisions are made when we allow Jehovah God’s thinking to be the determining factor.</p>
</div>
<h3 id="p11" data-pid="11"><strong>WEEK OF JULY 18-24, 2016</strong></h3>
<p id="p12" data-pid="12" class="p12">18  <a href="2016367.xhtml"><strong>Is the Bible Still Changing Your Life?</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxContent"><p id="p13" data-pid="13" class="p13">Do you find the refining of your Christian qualities now harder than the larger changes you made before baptism? This article explains why this challenge exists and how we can continue to cultivate godly qualities with the help of God’s Word.</p>
</div>
<h3 id="p14" data-pid="14"><strong>WEEK OF JULY 25-31, 2016</strong></h3>
<p id="p15" data-pid="15" class="p15">23  <a href="2016364.xhtml"><strong>Benefit Fully From Jehovah’s Provisions</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxContent"><p id="p16" data-pid="16" class="p16">This article alerts us to a trap that could cause us to miss out on beneficial spiritual provisions. We will consider how we can avoid falling into that trap, and we will learn how to benefit from all the spiritual food available to us.</p>
</div>
</div>
<p id="p17" data-pid="17" class="p17">28  <a href="2016368.xhtml"><strong>From Our Archives</strong></a></p>
<p id="p18" data-pid="18" class="p18">30  <a href="2016363.xhtml"><strong>Questions From Readers</strong></a></p>
</div>
<p id="p19" data-pid="19" class="p19"></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation1"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong></a> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation2"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource2">^ <strong>(Matt. 4:19)</strong></a> And he said to them: “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
