<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 September 5-11</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016322.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:1-176)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Happy are those who are blameless* in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Happy are those who observe his reminders, Who search for him with all their heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They practice no unrighteousness; They walk in his ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If only I could remain steadfast* So as to observe your regulations!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then I would not be put to shame When I consider all your commandments.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>With my whole heart I seek you. Do not let me stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>In my heart I treasure up your saying So that I may not sin against you. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>May you be praised, O Jehovah; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>With my lips I declare All the judgments that you have spoken. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your reminders More than over all other valuable things. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will ponder over* your orders And keep my eyes on your paths. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I am fond of your statutes. I will not forget your word. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Deal kindly with your servant, So that I may live and observe your word. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Open my eyes so that I may see clearly The wonderful things from your law. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>I am but a foreigner in the land. Do not hide your commandments from me. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I am* consumed with longing For your judgments at all times. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>You rebuke the presumptuous, The cursed ones who stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Remove from me* scorn and contempt, For I have observed your reminders. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Even when princes sit together and speak against me, Your servant ponders over* your regulations. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I am fond of your reminders; They are my advisers. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I lie* prostrate in the dust. Preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I told you of my ways, and you answered me; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Make me understand the meaning* of your orders, So that I may ponder over* your wonderful works. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>I have* been sleepless from grief. Strengthen me according to your word. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Remove from me the way of deception, And favor me with your law. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The way of faithfulness I have chosen. I recognize that your judgments are right. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I cling to your reminders. O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>I will eagerly pursue* the way of your commandments Because you make room for it in my heart.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.* <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Fulfill your promise* to your servant, So that you may be feared.* <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>Remove the disgrace that I dread, For your judgments are good. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah, Your salvation in harmony with your promise;* <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in* your judgment. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>And I will walk about in a place of safety,* For I search for your orders. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>I am fond of your commandments, Yes, I love them. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love, And I will ponder over* your regulations. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Remember your word* to your servant, Through which you give me hope.* <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>This is my comfort in my affliction, For your saying has preserved me alive. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>The presumptuous utterly scorn me, But I do not deviate from your law. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah, And I find comfort in them. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked, Who forsake your law. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>Your regulations are songs to me Wherever I dwell.* <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah, So that I may keep your law. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>This has been my practice Because I have observed your orders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>Jehovah is my portion; I have promised to keep your words. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>I appeal to you* with all my heart; Show me favor according to your promise.* <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>I have examined my ways, In order to turn my feet back to your reminders. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>I hurry and do not delay To keep your commandments. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>The ropes of the wicked surround me, But your law I do not forget. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>At midnight I get up to give you thanks For your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>I am a friend of all who fear you And of those who keep your orders. <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>You have dealt well with your servant, O Jehovah, according to your word. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>Teach me good sense and knowledge, For I have put my trust in your commandments. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray,* But now I keep your saying. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>You are good and your works are good. Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>The presumptuous smear me with lies, But I observe your orders with all my heart. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>Their heart is insensitive,* But I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>It is good that I have been afflicted, So that I may learn your regulations. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>The law that you have proclaimed is good for me, More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver. <strong><sup>73 </sup></strong>Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments. <strong><sup>74 </sup></strong>Those who fear you see me and rejoice, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>75 </sup></strong>I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteous And that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness. <strong><sup>76 </sup></strong>May your loyal love please comfort me, According to the promise* you made to your servant. <strong><sup>77 </sup></strong>Show me mercy, so that I may keep living, For I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>78 </sup></strong>May the presumptuous be put to shame, For they wrong me without cause.* But I will ponder over* your orders. <strong><sup>79 </sup></strong>Let those who fear you return to me, Those who know your reminders. <strong><sup>80 </sup></strong>May my heart be blameless in following your regulations, So that I may not be put to shame. <strong><sup>81 </sup></strong>I long for* your salvation, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>82 </sup></strong>My eyes long for your saying While I say: “When will you comfort me?” <strong><sup>83 </sup></strong>For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke, But your regulations I do not forget. <strong><sup>84 </sup></strong>How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me? <strong><sup>85 </sup></strong>The presumptuous dig pits for me, Those who defy your law. <strong><sup>86 </sup></strong>All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me! <strong><sup>87 </sup></strong>They almost exterminated me from the earth, But I did not abandon your orders. <strong><sup>88 </sup></strong>Preserve me alive because of your loyal love, So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken. <strong><sup>89 </sup></strong>Forever, O Jehovah, Your word will remain in the heavens. <strong><sup>90 </sup></strong>Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand. <strong><sup>91 </sup></strong>By your judgments they* remain until today, For they are all your servants. <strong><sup>92 </sup></strong>If I had not been fond of your law, I would have perished in my affliction. <strong><sup>93 </sup></strong>I will never forget your orders, Because by them you have preserved me alive. <strong><sup>94 </sup></strong>I belong to you; save me, Because I have searched for your orders. <strong><sup>95 </sup></strong>The wicked wait to destroy me, But I give close attention to your reminders. <strong><sup>96 </sup></strong>I have seen a limit to all perfection, But your commandment has no limit.* <strong><sup>97 </sup></strong>How I do love your law! I ponder over* it all day long. <strong><sup>98 </sup></strong>Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies, Because it is with me forever. <strong><sup>99 </sup></strong>I have more insight than all my teachers, Because I ponder over* your reminders. <strong><sup>100 </sup></strong>I act with more understanding than older men, Because I observe your orders. <strong><sup>101 </sup></strong>I refuse to walk on any evil path, So that I may keep your word. <strong><sup>102 </sup></strong>I do not turn aside from your judgments, For you have instructed me. <strong><sup>103 </sup></strong>How sweet your sayings are to my palate, More so than honey to my mouth! <strong><sup>104 </sup></strong>By your orders I act with understanding. That is why I hate every false path. <strong><sup>105 </sup></strong>Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path. <strong><sup>106 </sup></strong>I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out, To observe your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>107 </sup></strong>I have been greatly afflicted. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>108 </sup></strong>Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise,* O Jehovah, And teach me your judgments. <strong><sup>109 </sup></strong>My life is in constant danger,* But I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>110 </sup></strong>The wicked have set a trap for me, But I have not strayed from your orders. <strong><sup>111 </sup></strong>I take your reminders as my permanent possession,* For they are the joy of my heart. <strong><sup>112 </sup></strong>I have resolved* to obey your regulations At all times, down to the last. <strong><sup>113 </sup></strong>I hate the halfhearted ones,* But I love your law. <strong><sup>114 </sup></strong>You are my shelter and my shield, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>115 </sup></strong>Stay away from me, you evil men, So that I may observe the commandments of my God. <strong><sup>116 </sup></strong>Support me as you promised,* So that I may keep living; Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.* <strong><sup>117 </sup></strong>Support me that I may be saved; Then I will always concentrate on your regulations. <strong><sup>118 </sup></strong>You reject all those who stray from your regulations, For they are false and deceitful. <strong><sup>119 </sup></strong>You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross. That is why I love your reminders. <strong><sup>120 </sup></strong>The dread of you makes my body* tremble; I am in fear of your judgments. <strong><sup>121 </sup></strong>I have done what is just and righteous. Do not abandon me to my oppressors! <strong><sup>122 </sup></strong>Guarantee the welfare of your servant; May the presumptuous not oppress me. <strong><sup>123 </sup></strong>My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvation And for your righteous promise.* <strong><sup>124 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>125 </sup></strong>I am your servant; give me understanding, So that I may know your reminders. <strong><sup>126 </sup></strong>The time has come for Jehovah to act, For they have broken your law. <strong><sup>127 </sup></strong>That is why I love your commandments More than gold, even fine* gold. <strong><sup>128 </sup></strong>Therefore, I consider every instruction* from you to be right; I hate every false path. <strong><sup>129 </sup></strong>Your reminders are wonderful. That is why I observe* them. <strong><sup>130 </sup></strong>The disclosure of your words brings light, Giving understanding to the inexperienced. <strong><sup>131 </sup></strong>I open my mouth wide and sigh,* Because I long for your commandments. <strong><sup>132 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor, In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name. <strong><sup>133 </sup></strong>Guide my steps safely* by your saying; May nothing wicked dominate me. <strong><sup>134 </sup></strong>Rescue* me from oppressive men, And I will keep your orders. <strong><sup>135 </sup></strong>Make your face shine* upon your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>136 </sup></strong>Tears stream down from my eyes Because people do not keep your law. <strong><sup>137 </sup></strong>You are righteous, O Jehovah, And your judgments are fair. <strong><sup>138 </sup></strong>The reminders you give are righteous And completely reliable. <strong><sup>139 </sup></strong>My zeal consumes me, Because my adversaries have forgotten your words. <strong><sup>140 </sup></strong>Your saying is thoroughly refined, And your servant loves it. <strong><sup>141 </sup></strong>I am insignificant and despised; Yet, I have not forgotten your orders. <strong><sup>142 </sup></strong>Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness, And your law is truth. <strong><sup>143 </sup></strong>Though distress and difficulty come upon me, I remain fond of your commandments. <strong><sup>144 </sup></strong>The righteousness of your reminders is eternal. Give me understanding, so that I may keep living. <strong><sup>145 </sup></strong>I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe. <strong><sup>146 </sup></strong>I call on you; save me! I will keep your reminders. <strong><sup>147 </sup></strong>I have been awake before dawn* to cry for help, For your words are my hope.* <strong><sup>148 </sup></strong>My eyes open before the night watches, So that I can ponder over* your saying. <strong><sup>149 </sup></strong>Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice. <strong><sup>150 </sup></strong>Those who engage in shameful conduct* come near; They are far away from your law. <strong><sup>151 </sup></strong>You are near, O Jehovah, And all your commandments are truth. <strong><sup>152 </sup></strong>Long ago I learned about your reminders, That you have established them to last forever. <strong><sup>153 </sup></strong>Look on my affliction and rescue me, For I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>154 </sup></strong>Defend me* and rescue me; Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.* <strong><sup>155 </sup></strong>Salvation is far away from the wicked, For they have not searched for your regulations. <strong><sup>156 </sup></strong>Your mercy is great, O Jehovah. Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice. <strong><sup>157 </sup></strong>My persecutors and my adversaries are many; But I have not deviated from your reminders. <strong><sup>158 </sup></strong>I look on the treacherous with loathing, Because they do not keep your saying. <strong><sup>159 </sup></strong>See how I love your orders! O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love. <strong><sup>160 </sup></strong>The very essence of your word is truth, And all your righteous judgments endure forever. <strong><sup>161 </sup></strong>Princes persecute me for no cause, But my heart stands in awe of your words. <strong><sup>162 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your saying Like someone who finds great spoil. <strong><sup>163 </sup></strong>I hate falsehood—I detest it— I love your law. <strong><sup>164 </sup></strong>Seven times a day I praise you Because of your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>165 </sup></strong>Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; Nothing can make them stumble.* <strong><sup>166 </sup></strong>I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah, And I observe your commandments. <strong><sup>167 </sup></strong>I keep* your reminders, And I love them dearly. <strong><sup>168 </sup></strong>I observe your orders and your reminders, For you are aware of all that I do. <strong><sup>169 </sup></strong>May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah. According to your word, make me understand. <strong><sup>170 </sup></strong>May my request for favor come before you. Save me, as you have promised.* <strong><sup>171 </sup></strong>May my lips overflow with praise, For you teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>172 </sup></strong>May my tongue sing about your saying, For all your commandments are righteous. <strong><sup>173 </sup></strong>May your hand be ready to help me, Because I choose to obey your orders. <strong><sup>174 </sup></strong>I long for your salvation, O Jehovah, And I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>175 </sup></strong>Let me* live so that I may praise you; May your judgments be my help. <strong><sup>176 </sup></strong>I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant, For I have not forgotten your commandments.</p><p></p><p>Or “who keep integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “O that my ways were firmly established.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll away from upon me.”</p><p>Or “studies.”</p><p>Or “My soul lies.”</p><p>Lit., “way.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “will run.”</p><p>Or possibly, “you make my heart have the confidence.”</p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p><p>Or “to profits.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Which is made to those who fear you.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I wait for.”</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “promise.”</p><p>Or “For which you made me wait.”</p><p>Or “In the house where I dwell as a foreigner.”</p><p>Or “I soften (seek the smile of) your face.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I was sinning by mistake.”</p><p>Lit., “unfeeling, like fat.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “with lies.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul pines for.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>That is, all his creative works.</p><p>Lit., “is very broad.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Lit., “the voluntary offerings of my mouth.”</p><p>Or “My soul is in my hand constantly.”</p><p>Or “my eternal heritage.”</p><p>Lit., “have inclined my heart.”</p><p>Or “men of divided heart.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “flesh.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “refined.”</p><p>Or “order.”</p><p>Or “my soul observes.”</p><p>Lit., “pant.”</p><p>Or “Make my steps steady.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeem.”</p><p>Or “smile.”</p><p>Or “in the morning twilight.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your words.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “in obscene conduct.”</p><p>Or “Conduct my legal case.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “For them there is no stumbling block.”</p><p>Or “My soul keeps.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016322.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:73-93)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments. <strong><sup>74 </sup></strong>Those who fear you see me and rejoice, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>75 </sup></strong>I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteous And that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness. <strong><sup>76 </sup></strong>May your loyal love please comfort me, According to the promise* you made to your servant. <strong><sup>77 </sup></strong>Show me mercy, so that I may keep living, For I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>78 </sup></strong>May the presumptuous be put to shame, For they wrong me without cause.* But I will ponder over* your orders. <strong><sup>79 </sup></strong>Let those who fear you return to me, Those who know your reminders. <strong><sup>80 </sup></strong>May my heart be blameless in following your regulations, So that I may not be put to shame. <strong><sup>81 </sup></strong>I long for* your salvation, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>82 </sup></strong>My eyes long for your saying While I say: “When will you comfort me?” <strong><sup>83 </sup></strong>For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke, But your regulations I do not forget. <strong><sup>84 </sup></strong>How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me? <strong><sup>85 </sup></strong>The presumptuous dig pits for me, Those who defy your law. <strong><sup>86 </sup></strong>All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me! <strong><sup>87 </sup></strong>They almost exterminated me from the earth, But I did not abandon your orders. <strong><sup>88 </sup></strong>Preserve me alive because of your loyal love, So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken. <strong><sup>89 </sup></strong>Forever, O Jehovah, Your word will remain in the heavens. <strong><sup>90 </sup></strong>Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand. <strong><sup>91 </sup></strong>By your judgments they* remain until today, For they are all your servants. <strong><sup>92 </sup></strong>If I had not been fond of your law, I would have perished in my affliction. <strong><sup>93 </sup></strong>I will never forget your orders, Because by them you have preserved me alive.</p><p></p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “with lies.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul pines for.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>That is, all his creative works.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 48 Daily Walking With Jehovah***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 48</p>
<h1><strong>Daily Walking With Jehovah</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">Micah 6:8</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Hand in hand with our dear Father,</p>
<p class="p5">We would humbly walk with him each day.</p>
<p class="p6">Oh, how undeserved his kindness</p>
<p class="p7">That he grants to those who seek his way!</p>
<p class="p8">God for us has made provision</p>
<p class="p9">That we thus can take his hand.</p>
<p class="p10">So we make our dedication;</p>
<p class="p11">With Jehovah we take our stand.</p>
<p class="p12">2. In this day of mankind’s judgment,</p>
<p class="p13">As the system’s end is drawing near,</p>
<p class="p14">We are faced with opposition</p>
<p class="p15">That could make us turn away in fear.</p>
<p class="p16">But Jehovah gives protection;</p>
<p class="p17">Close to him we want to stay</p>
<p class="p18">That we might forever serve him.</p>
<p class="p19">Love him loyally, never stray.</p>
<p class="p20">3. Help for us God has provided</p>
<p class="p21">Through his spirit and his written Word,</p>
<p class="p22">Through the Christian congregation,</p>
<p class="p23">Through assurance that our prayer is heard.</p>
<p class="p24">As we’re walking with Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p25">He will help us do what’s right,</p>
<p class="p26">Help us imitate his kindness</p>
<p class="p27">And walk modestly in his sight.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Gen. 5:24;</a><span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10"> 6:9;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> 1 Ki. 2:3, 4</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Mic. 6:8)</strong></a> He has told you, O man, what is good. And what is Jehovah requiring* of you? Only to exercise justice,* to cherish loyalty,* And to walk in modesty with your God!</p><p></p><p>Or “asking back.”</p><p>Or “to be just; to be fair.”</p><p>Or “to be kind and loyal in your love.” Lit., “to love loyal love.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Gen. 5:24)</strong></a> Eʹnoch kept walking with the true God. Then he was no more, for God took him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Gen. 6:9)</strong></a> This is the history of Noah. Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless* among his contemporaries.* Noah walked with the true God.</p><p></p><p>Or “blameless.”</p><p>Lit., “his generations.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(1 Ki. 2:3, 4)</strong></a> You must keep your obligation to Jehovah your God by walking in his ways and by observing his statutes, his commandments, his judgments, and his reminders as they are written in the Law of Moses; then you will succeed* in everything you do and everywhere you turn. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And Jehovah will carry out his promise that he made concerning me: ‘If your sons pay attention to their way by walking faithfully before me with all their heart and soul,* there will never fail to be a man of your line* sitting on the throne of Israel.’</p><p></p><p>Or “act wisely.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “will not be cut off from you a man.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w05 4/15 pp. 10-11 Trust in Jehovah’s Word***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Obey God’s Word and Be Happy</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 3. Explain and illustrate what it means to be faultless.</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>3 </sup>True happiness depends on our walking in God’s law. (<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Psalm 119:1-8</a>) If we do this, Jehovah will consider us ‘faultless in our way.’ (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Psalm 119:1</a>) Being faultless does not mean that we are perfect, but it does indicate that we strive to do Jehovah God’s will. Noah “proved himself faultless among his contemporaries” as a man who “walked with the true God.” That faithful patriarch and his family survived the Flood because he pursued the life course outlined by Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Genesis 6:9;</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> 1 Peter 3:20</a>) Similarly, our survival of this world’s end depends on our ‘carefully keeping God’s orders,’ thus doing his will.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Psalm 119:4</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 4. Our happiness and success depend on what?</p>
<p class="p7"><sup>4 </sup>Jehovah will never leave us if we ‘laud him with uprightness of heart and continue to keep his regulations.’ (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Psalm 119:7, 8</a>) God did not abandon the Israelite leader Joshua, who applied the counsel to ‘read in the book of the law day and night so that he might do all that was written in it.’ That made him successful and enabled him to act wisely. (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Joshua 1:8</a>) Near the end of his life, Joshua was still lauding God and could remind the Israelites: “You well know with all your hearts and with all your souls that not one word out of all the good words that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed.” (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Joshua 23:14</a>) Like Joshua and the writer of <span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Psalm 119</a>, we can find happiness and success by praising Jehovah and trusting in his word.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:1-8)</strong> Happy are those who are blameless* in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Happy are those who observe his reminders, Who search for him with all their heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They practice no unrighteousness; They walk in his ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If only I could remain steadfast* So as to observe your regulations!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then I would not be put to shame When I consider all your commandments.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.</p><p></p><p>Or “who keep integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “O that my ways were firmly established.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:1)</strong> Happy are those who are blameless* in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “who keep integrity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 6:9)</strong> This is the history of Noah. Noah was a righteous man. He proved himself faultless* among his contemporaries.* Noah walked with the true God.</p><p></p><p>Or “blameless.”</p><p>Lit., “his generations.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 3:20)</strong> who had formerly been disobedient when God was patiently waiting* in Noah’s day, while the ark was being constructed, in which a few people, that is, eight souls,* were carried safely through the water.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the patience of God was waiting.”</p><p>Or “persons.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:4)</strong> You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:7, 8)</strong> I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 1:8)</strong> This book of the Law should not depart from your mouth, and you must read it in an undertone* day and night, in order to observe carefully all that is written in it; for then your way will be successful and then you will act wisely.</p><p></p><p>Or “meditate on it.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 23:14)</strong> “Now look! I am about to die,* and you well know with all your heart and with all your soul* that not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “I am going today in the way of all the earth.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:1-176)</strong> Happy are those who are blameless* in their way, Who walk in the law of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Happy are those who observe his reminders, Who search for him with all their heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They practice no unrighteousness; They walk in his ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You have commanded That your orders be carefully kept.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If only I could remain steadfast* So as to observe your regulations!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then I would not be put to shame When I consider all your commandments.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I will praise you with an upright heart When I learn your righteous judgments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will observe your regulations. May you never utterly forsake me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>With my whole heart I seek you. Do not let me stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>In my heart I treasure up your saying So that I may not sin against you. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>May you be praised, O Jehovah; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>With my lips I declare All the judgments that you have spoken. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your reminders More than over all other valuable things. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will ponder over* your orders And keep my eyes on your paths. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I am fond of your statutes. I will not forget your word. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Deal kindly with your servant, So that I may live and observe your word. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Open my eyes so that I may see clearly The wonderful things from your law. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>I am but a foreigner in the land. Do not hide your commandments from me. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I am* consumed with longing For your judgments at all times. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>You rebuke the presumptuous, The cursed ones who stray from your commandments. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Remove from me* scorn and contempt, For I have observed your reminders. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Even when princes sit together and speak against me, Your servant ponders over* your regulations. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I am fond of your reminders; They are my advisers. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I lie* prostrate in the dust. Preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I told you of my ways, and you answered me; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Make me understand the meaning* of your orders, So that I may ponder over* your wonderful works. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>I have* been sleepless from grief. Strengthen me according to your word. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Remove from me the way of deception, And favor me with your law. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The way of faithfulness I have chosen. I recognize that your judgments are right. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I cling to your reminders. O Jehovah, do not let me be disappointed.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>I will eagerly pursue* the way of your commandments Because you make room for it in my heart.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.* <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Fulfill your promise* to your servant, So that you may be feared.* <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>Remove the disgrace that I dread, For your judgments are good. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah, Your salvation in harmony with your promise;* <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in* your judgment. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>And I will walk about in a place of safety,* For I search for your orders. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>I am fond of your commandments, Yes, I love them. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love, And I will ponder over* your regulations. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Remember your word* to your servant, Through which you give me hope.* <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>This is my comfort in my affliction, For your saying has preserved me alive. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>The presumptuous utterly scorn me, But I do not deviate from your law. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>I remember your judgments from of old, O Jehovah, And I find comfort in them. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>I am seized with burning rage because of the wicked, Who forsake your law. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>Your regulations are songs to me Wherever I dwell.* <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>During the night I remember your name, O Jehovah, So that I may keep your law. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>This has been my practice Because I have observed your orders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>Jehovah is my portion; I have promised to keep your words. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>I appeal to you* with all my heart; Show me favor according to your promise.* <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>I have examined my ways, In order to turn my feet back to your reminders. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>I hurry and do not delay To keep your commandments. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>The ropes of the wicked surround me, But your law I do not forget. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>At midnight I get up to give you thanks For your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>I am a friend of all who fear you And of those who keep your orders. <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>Your loyal love, O Jehovah, fills the earth; Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>You have dealt well with your servant, O Jehovah, according to your word. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>Teach me good sense and knowledge, For I have put my trust in your commandments. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>Before I was afflicted, I used to go astray,* But now I keep your saying. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>You are good and your works are good. Teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>The presumptuous smear me with lies, But I observe your orders with all my heart. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>Their heart is insensitive,* But I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>It is good that I have been afflicted, So that I may learn your regulations. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>The law that you have proclaimed is good for me, More so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver. <strong><sup>73 </sup></strong>Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments. <strong><sup>74 </sup></strong>Those who fear you see me and rejoice, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>75 </sup></strong>I know, O Jehovah, that your judgments are righteous And that you have afflicted me in your faithfulness. <strong><sup>76 </sup></strong>May your loyal love please comfort me, According to the promise* you made to your servant. <strong><sup>77 </sup></strong>Show me mercy, so that I may keep living, For I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>78 </sup></strong>May the presumptuous be put to shame, For they wrong me without cause.* But I will ponder over* your orders. <strong><sup>79 </sup></strong>Let those who fear you return to me, Those who know your reminders. <strong><sup>80 </sup></strong>May my heart be blameless in following your regulations, So that I may not be put to shame. <strong><sup>81 </sup></strong>I long for* your salvation, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>82 </sup></strong>My eyes long for your saying While I say: “When will you comfort me?” <strong><sup>83 </sup></strong>For I am like a skin bottle dried up in the smoke, But your regulations I do not forget. <strong><sup>84 </sup></strong>How many days must your servant wait? When will you bring judgment against those persecuting me? <strong><sup>85 </sup></strong>The presumptuous dig pits for me, Those who defy your law. <strong><sup>86 </sup></strong>All your commandments are trustworthy. Men persecute me without cause; help me! <strong><sup>87 </sup></strong>They almost exterminated me from the earth, But I did not abandon your orders. <strong><sup>88 </sup></strong>Preserve me alive because of your loyal love, So that I may keep the reminders you have spoken. <strong><sup>89 </sup></strong>Forever, O Jehovah, Your word will remain in the heavens. <strong><sup>90 </sup></strong>Your faithfulness is through all generations. You have firmly established the earth, so that it continues to stand. <strong><sup>91 </sup></strong>By your judgments they* remain until today, For they are all your servants. <strong><sup>92 </sup></strong>If I had not been fond of your law, I would have perished in my affliction. <strong><sup>93 </sup></strong>I will never forget your orders, Because by them you have preserved me alive. <strong><sup>94 </sup></strong>I belong to you; save me, Because I have searched for your orders. <strong><sup>95 </sup></strong>The wicked wait to destroy me, But I give close attention to your reminders. <strong><sup>96 </sup></strong>I have seen a limit to all perfection, But your commandment has no limit.* <strong><sup>97 </sup></strong>How I do love your law! I ponder over* it all day long. <strong><sup>98 </sup></strong>Your commandment makes me wiser than my enemies, Because it is with me forever. <strong><sup>99 </sup></strong>I have more insight than all my teachers, Because I ponder over* your reminders. <strong><sup>100 </sup></strong>I act with more understanding than older men, Because I observe your orders. <strong><sup>101 </sup></strong>I refuse to walk on any evil path, So that I may keep your word. <strong><sup>102 </sup></strong>I do not turn aside from your judgments, For you have instructed me. <strong><sup>103 </sup></strong>How sweet your sayings are to my palate, More so than honey to my mouth! <strong><sup>104 </sup></strong>By your orders I act with understanding. That is why I hate every false path. <strong><sup>105 </sup></strong>Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path. <strong><sup>106 </sup></strong>I have sworn an oath, and I will carry it out, To observe your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>107 </sup></strong>I have been greatly afflicted. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your word. <strong><sup>108 </sup></strong>Please take pleasure in my voluntary offerings of praise,* O Jehovah, And teach me your judgments. <strong><sup>109 </sup></strong>My life is in constant danger,* But I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>110 </sup></strong>The wicked have set a trap for me, But I have not strayed from your orders. <strong><sup>111 </sup></strong>I take your reminders as my permanent possession,* For they are the joy of my heart. <strong><sup>112 </sup></strong>I have resolved* to obey your regulations At all times, down to the last. <strong><sup>113 </sup></strong>I hate the halfhearted ones,* But I love your law. <strong><sup>114 </sup></strong>You are my shelter and my shield, For your word is my hope.* <strong><sup>115 </sup></strong>Stay away from me, you evil men, So that I may observe the commandments of my God. <strong><sup>116 </sup></strong>Support me as you promised,* So that I may keep living; Do not let my hope turn into disappointment.* <strong><sup>117 </sup></strong>Support me that I may be saved; Then I will always concentrate on your regulations. <strong><sup>118 </sup></strong>You reject all those who stray from your regulations, For they are false and deceitful. <strong><sup>119 </sup></strong>You discard all the wicked of the earth as if they were worthless dross. That is why I love your reminders. <strong><sup>120 </sup></strong>The dread of you makes my body* tremble; I am in fear of your judgments. <strong><sup>121 </sup></strong>I have done what is just and righteous. Do not abandon me to my oppressors! <strong><sup>122 </sup></strong>Guarantee the welfare of your servant; May the presumptuous not oppress me. <strong><sup>123 </sup></strong>My eyes have grown weary waiting for your salvation And for your righteous promise.* <strong><sup>124 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>125 </sup></strong>I am your servant; give me understanding, So that I may know your reminders. <strong><sup>126 </sup></strong>The time has come for Jehovah to act, For they have broken your law. <strong><sup>127 </sup></strong>That is why I love your commandments More than gold, even fine* gold. <strong><sup>128 </sup></strong>Therefore, I consider every instruction* from you to be right; I hate every false path. <strong><sup>129 </sup></strong>Your reminders are wonderful. That is why I observe* them. <strong><sup>130 </sup></strong>The disclosure of your words brings light, Giving understanding to the inexperienced. <strong><sup>131 </sup></strong>I open my mouth wide and sigh,* Because I long for your commandments. <strong><sup>132 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor, In keeping with your judgment toward those loving your name. <strong><sup>133 </sup></strong>Guide my steps safely* by your saying; May nothing wicked dominate me. <strong><sup>134 </sup></strong>Rescue* me from oppressive men, And I will keep your orders. <strong><sup>135 </sup></strong>Make your face shine* upon your servant, And teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>136 </sup></strong>Tears stream down from my eyes Because people do not keep your law. <strong><sup>137 </sup></strong>You are righteous, O Jehovah, And your judgments are fair. <strong><sup>138 </sup></strong>The reminders you give are righteous And completely reliable. <strong><sup>139 </sup></strong>My zeal consumes me, Because my adversaries have forgotten your words. <strong><sup>140 </sup></strong>Your saying is thoroughly refined, And your servant loves it. <strong><sup>141 </sup></strong>I am insignificant and despised; Yet, I have not forgotten your orders. <strong><sup>142 </sup></strong>Your righteousness is an eternal righteousness, And your law is truth. <strong><sup>143 </sup></strong>Though distress and difficulty come upon me, I remain fond of your commandments. <strong><sup>144 </sup></strong>The righteousness of your reminders is eternal. Give me understanding, so that I may keep living. <strong><sup>145 </sup></strong>I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe. <strong><sup>146 </sup></strong>I call on you; save me! I will keep your reminders. <strong><sup>147 </sup></strong>I have been awake before dawn* to cry for help, For your words are my hope.* <strong><sup>148 </sup></strong>My eyes open before the night watches, So that I can ponder over* your saying. <strong><sup>149 </sup></strong>Do listen to my voice because of your loyal love. O Jehovah, preserve me alive according to your justice. <strong><sup>150 </sup></strong>Those who engage in shameful conduct* come near; They are far away from your law. <strong><sup>151 </sup></strong>You are near, O Jehovah, And all your commandments are truth. <strong><sup>152 </sup></strong>Long ago I learned about your reminders, That you have established them to last forever. <strong><sup>153 </sup></strong>Look on my affliction and rescue me, For I have not forgotten your law. <strong><sup>154 </sup></strong>Defend me* and rescue me; Preserve me alive in harmony with your promise.* <strong><sup>155 </sup></strong>Salvation is far away from the wicked, For they have not searched for your regulations. <strong><sup>156 </sup></strong>Your mercy is great, O Jehovah. Preserve me alive in harmony with your justice. <strong><sup>157 </sup></strong>My persecutors and my adversaries are many; But I have not deviated from your reminders. <strong><sup>158 </sup></strong>I look on the treacherous with loathing, Because they do not keep your saying. <strong><sup>159 </sup></strong>See how I love your orders! O Jehovah, preserve me alive because of your loyal love. <strong><sup>160 </sup></strong>The very essence of your word is truth, And all your righteous judgments endure forever. <strong><sup>161 </sup></strong>Princes persecute me for no cause, But my heart stands in awe of your words. <strong><sup>162 </sup></strong>I rejoice over your saying Like someone who finds great spoil. <strong><sup>163 </sup></strong>I hate falsehood—I detest it— I love your law. <strong><sup>164 </sup></strong>Seven times a day I praise you Because of your righteous judgments. <strong><sup>165 </sup></strong>Abundant peace belongs to those who love your law; Nothing can make them stumble.* <strong><sup>166 </sup></strong>I hope for your acts of salvation, O Jehovah, And I observe your commandments. <strong><sup>167 </sup></strong>I keep* your reminders, And I love them dearly. <strong><sup>168 </sup></strong>I observe your orders and your reminders, For you are aware of all that I do. <strong><sup>169 </sup></strong>May my cry for help reach you, O Jehovah. According to your word, make me understand. <strong><sup>170 </sup></strong>May my request for favor come before you. Save me, as you have promised.* <strong><sup>171 </sup></strong>May my lips overflow with praise, For you teach me your regulations. <strong><sup>172 </sup></strong>May my tongue sing about your saying, For all your commandments are righteous. <strong><sup>173 </sup></strong>May your hand be ready to help me, Because I choose to obey your orders. <strong><sup>174 </sup></strong>I long for your salvation, O Jehovah, And I am fond of your law. <strong><sup>175 </sup></strong>Let me* live so that I may praise you; May your judgments be my help. <strong><sup>176 </sup></strong>I have strayed like a lost sheep. Search for your servant, For I have not forgotten your commandments.</p><p></p><p>Or “who keep integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “O that my ways were firmly established.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “Roll away from upon me.”</p><p>Or “studies.”</p><p>Or “My soul lies.”</p><p>Lit., “way.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “will run.”</p><p>Or possibly, “you make my heart have the confidence.”</p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p><p>Or “to profits.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Which is made to those who fear you.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I wait for.”</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “promise.”</p><p>Or “For which you made me wait.”</p><p>Or “In the house where I dwell as a foreigner.”</p><p>Or “I soften (seek the smile of) your face.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I was sinning by mistake.”</p><p>Lit., “unfeeling, like fat.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “with lies.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “My soul pines for.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>That is, all his creative works.</p><p>Lit., “is very broad.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Lit., “the voluntary offerings of my mouth.”</p><p>Or “My soul is in my hand constantly.”</p><p>Or “my eternal heritage.”</p><p>Lit., “have inclined my heart.”</p><p>Or “men of divided heart.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your word.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “be put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “flesh.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “refined.”</p><p>Or “order.”</p><p>Or “my soul observes.”</p><p>Lit., “pant.”</p><p>Or “Make my steps steady.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeem.”</p><p>Or “smile.”</p><p>Or “in the morning twilight.”</p><p>Or “I wait for your words.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p><p>Or “in obscene conduct.”</p><p>Or “Conduct my legal case.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “For them there is no stumbling block.”</p><p>Or “My soul keeps.”</p><p>Or “according to your saying.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w05 4/15 pp. 12-13 Trust in Jehovah’s Word***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p17"><strong>Jehovah’s Word Imparts Courage</strong></p>
<p class="qu">12. How can we personally apply <span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Psalm 119:36, 37</a>?</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>12 </sup>Following the guidance of God’s word gives us the courage needed to cope with life’s trials. (<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Psalm 119:33-40</a>) We humbly seek Jehovah’s instruction so that we can keep his law “with the whole heart.” (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Psalm 119:33, 34</a>) Like the psalmist, we ask of God: “Incline my heart to your reminders, and not to profits,” or “unjust profit.” (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Psalm 119:36</a>; footnote) Like the apostle Paul, we “conduct ourselves honestly in all things.” (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Hebrews 13:18</a>) If an employer wants us to do something dishonest, we muster up courage to adhere to God’s directions<wbr />—and Jehovah always blesses such a course. In fact, he helps us to keep all bad inclinations under control. Let us therefore pray: “Make my eyes pass on from seeing what is worthless.” (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Psalm 119:37</a>) Never would we want to view as desirable any worthless thing hated by God. (<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Psalm 97:10</a>) Among other things, this moves us to avoid pornography and spiritistic practices.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">1 Corinthians 6:9, 10;</a><span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29"> Revelation 21:8</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:36, 37)</strong></a> Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.* <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way.</p><p></p><p>Or “to profits.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:33-40)</strong> Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.* <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Fulfill your promise* to your servant, So that you may be feared.* <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>Remove the disgrace that I dread, For your judgments are good. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>See how I long for your orders. Preserve me alive in your righteousness.</p><p></p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p><p>Or “to profits.”</p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Which is made to those who fear you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:33, 34)</strong> Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of your regulations, And I will follow it to the end. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Give me understanding, So that I may observe your law And keep it with my whole heart.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:36)</strong> Incline my heart to your reminders, Not to selfish gain.*</p><p></p><p>Or “to profits.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 13:18)</strong> Keep praying for us, for we trust we have an honest* conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “good.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:37)</strong> Turn my eyes away from looking at what is worthless; Preserve me alive in your way.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 97:10)</strong> O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives* of his loyal ones; He rescues them from the hand* of the wicked.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 6:9, 10)</strong> Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled.* Those who are sexually immoral,* idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality,* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers,* and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.</p><p></p><p>Or “deceived.”</p><p>See Glossary, “Sexual immorality.”</p><p>Or “men who have sex with men.” Lit., “men who lie with men.”</p><p>Or “the verbally abusive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 21:8)</strong> But as for the cowards and those without faith and those who are disgusting in their filth and murderers and the sexually immoral* and those practicing spiritism and idolaters and all the liars, their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur. This means the second death.”</p><p></p><p>See Glossary, “Sexual immorality.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w05 4/15 p. 13 Trust in Jehovah’s Word***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">13. How did Jesus’ persecuted disciples get the courage needed to witness boldly?</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>13 </sup>Accurate knowledge of God’s word gives us confidence to witness courageously. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Psalm 119:41-48</a>) And we do need courage to ‘answer the one reproaching us.’ (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Psalm 119:42</a>) At times, we may be like Jesus’ persecuted disciples, who prayed: “Jehovah, . . . grant your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness.” The result? “They were one and all filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.” The same Sovereign Lord gives us the courage to speak his word with boldness.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Acts 4:24-31</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">14. What helps us to witness courageously, as Paul did?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>14 </sup>We will have the courage needed to give a witness without any fear of shame if we cherish “the word of truth” and ‘keep God’s law constantly.’ (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Psalm 119:43, 44</a>) Diligent study of God’s written Word equips us to ‘speak about his reminders in front of kings.’ (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Psalm 119:46</a>) Prayer and Jehovah’s spirit will also help us to say the right things in a proper way. (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Matthew 10:16-20;</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> Colossians 4:6</a>) Paul courageously spoke about God’s reminders to first-century rulers. For example, he witnessed to Roman Governor Felix, who “listened to him on the belief in Christ Jesus.” (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Acts 24:24, 25</a>) Paul also gave a witness before Governor Festus and King Agrippa. (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Acts 25:22–26:32</a>) With Jehovah’s backing, we too can be courageous witnesses, never “ashamed of the good news.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Romans 1:16</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:41-48)</strong> May I experience your loyal love, O Jehovah, Your salvation in harmony with your promise;* <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in* your judgment. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>And I will walk about in a place of safety,* For I search for your orders. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>I am fond of your commandments, Yes, I love them. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>I will raise my hands to your commandments, which I love, And I will ponder over* your regulations.</p><p></p><p>Or “saying.”</p><p>Or “I wait for.”</p><p>Or “a roomy place.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:42)</strong> Then I will reply to the one taunting me, For I put my trust in your word.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Acts 4:24-31)</strong> On hearing this, they raised their voices with one accord to God and said: “Sovereign Lord, you are the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>and who said through holy spirit by the mouth of our forefather David, your servant: ‘Why did nations become agitated and peoples meditate on empty things? <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The kings of the earth took their stand and the rulers gathered together as one against Jehovah* and against his anointed one.’* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For truly both Herod and Pontius Pilate with men of the nations and with peoples of Israel were gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed, <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>to do what your hand and counsel had determined beforehand to occur. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>And now, Jehovah,* give attention to their threats, and grant to your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness, <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>while you stretch out your hand for healing and while signs and wonders* occur through the name of your holy servant Jesus.” <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And when they had made supplication,* the place where they were gathered together was shaken, and they were one and all filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “his Christ.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “portents.”</p><p>Or “had prayed earnestly.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:43, 44)</strong> Do not utterly remove the word of truth from my mouth, For I have hoped in* your judgment. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>I will keep your law constantly, Forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Or “I wait for.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:46)</strong> I will speak about your reminders in front of kings, And I will not be ashamed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 10:16-20)</strong> “Look! I am sending you out as sheep among wolves; so prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Be on your guard against men, for they will hand you over to local courts and they will scourge you in their synagogues. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>And you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them and the nations. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>However, when they hand you over, do not become anxious about how or what you are to speak, for what you are to speak will be given you in that hour; <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>for the ones speaking are not just you, but it is the spirit of your Father that speaks by you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Col. 4:6)</strong> Let your words always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you will know how you should answer each person.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Acts 24:24, 25)</strong> Some days later Felix came with Dru·silʹla his wife, who was Jewish, and he sent for Paul and listened to him speak about the belief in Christ Jesus. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But as Paul talked about righteousness and self-control and the judgment to come, Felix became frightened and answered: “Go away for now, but when I have an opportunity I will send for you again.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Acts 25:22-26:32)</strong> A·gripʹpa then said to Festus: “I would like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” he said, “you will hear him.” <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So the next day A·gripʹpa and Bernice came with much pompous show and entered the audience chamber together with military commanders as well as the prominent men in the city; and when Festus gave the command, Paul was brought in. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>And Festus said: “King A·gripʹpa and all you who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish populace have petitioned me both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But I perceived that he had done nothing deserving of death. So when this man himself appealed to the August One, I decided to send him. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>But I have nothing certain to write about him to my Lord. So I brought him before all of you, and especially before you, King A·gripʹpa, so that after the judicial examination has taken place, I might have something to write. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner and not also to indicate the charges against him.” </p><p><strong>26 </strong>A·gripʹpa said to Paul: “You are permitted to speak in your own behalf.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and proceeded to say in his defense: <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Concerning all the things of which I am accused by the Jews, King A·gripʹpa, I consider myself happy that it is before you I am to make my defense this day, <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>especially because you are an expert on all the customs as well as the controversies among the Jews. Therefore, I beg you to hear me patiently. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“Indeed, the manner of life I led from youth up among my people* and in Jerusalem is well-known by all the Jews <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>who were previously acquainted with me, if they would be willing to testify, that according to the strictest sect of our form of worship, I lived as a Pharisee. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>But now for the hope of the promise that was made by God to our forefathers, I stand on trial; <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>this is the same promise our 12 tribes are hoping to see fulfilled by intensely rendering him sacred service night and day. Concerning this hope I am accused by Jews, O King. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>“Why is it considered* unbelievable among you that God raises up the dead? <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>I, for one, was convinced that I should commit many acts of opposition against the name of Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>This is exactly what I did in Jerusalem, and I locked up many of the holy ones in prisons, for I had received authority from the chief priests; and when they were to be executed, I cast my vote against them. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>By punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to force them to recant; and since I was extremely furious with them, I went so far as to persecute them even in outlying cities. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“While doing this as I was traveling to Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I saw at midday on the road, O King, a light beyond the brilliance of the sun flash from heaven around me and around those traveling with me. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And when we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew language: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? To keep kicking against the goads* makes it hard for you.’ <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But I said: ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said: ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But rise and stand on your feet. This is why I have appeared to you, to choose you as a servant and a witness both of things you have seen and things I will make you see respecting me. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And I will rescue you from this people and from the nations, to whom I am sending you <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those sanctified by their faith in me.’ <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“Therefore, King A·gripʹpa, I did not become disobedient to the heavenly vision, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>but to those in Damascus first and then to those in Jerusalem, and over all the country of Ju·deʹa, and also to the nations, I was bringing the message that they should repent and turn to God by doing works that befit repentance. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>This is why the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>However, because I have experienced the help that is from God, I continue to this day bearing witness to both small and great, saying nothing except what the Prophets as well as Moses stated was going to take place— <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>that the Christ was to suffer and that as the first to be resurrected from the dead, he was going to proclaim light both to this people and to the nations.” <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Now as Paul was saying these things in his defense, Festus said in a loud voice: “You are going out of your mind, Paul! Great learning is driving you out of your mind!” <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But Paul said: “I am not going out of my mind, Your Excellency Festus, but I am speaking words of truth and of a sound mind. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For a fact, the king to whom I am speaking so freely well knows about these things; I am convinced that not one of these things escapes his notice, for none of this has been done in a corner. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do you, King A·gripʹpa, believe the Prophets? I know that you believe.” <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But A·gripʹpa said to Paul: “In a short time you would persuade me to become a Christian.” <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>At this Paul said: “I wish to God that whether in a short time or in a long time, not only you but also all those who hear me today would become men such as I am, with the exception of these prison bonds.” <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then the king rose and so did the governor and Bernice and the men seated with them. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>But as they were leaving, they began saying to one another: “This man is doing nothing deserving of death or prison bonds.” <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>A·gripʹpa then said to Festus: “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”</p><p></p><p>Or “nation.”</p><p>Lit., “judged.”</p><p>A goad is a pointed rod used to urge on an animal.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:16)</strong> For I am not ashamed of the good news; it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 14 par. 4 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p15"><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"><strong>119:71</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—What could be good about suffering affliction? </strong>Hardship can teach us to rely more fully on Jehovah, to pray to him more earnestly, and to be more diligent in studying the Bible and applying what it says. Moreover, our response to affliction can reveal personality flaws that can be corrected. Suffering will not make us bitter if we allow it to refine us.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:71)</strong> It is good that I have been afflicted, So that I may learn your regulations.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w06 9/1 p. 14 par. 5 Highlights From Book Five of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p16"><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"><strong>119:96</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—What is meant by ‘an end to all perfection’? </strong>The psalmist is speaking about perfection from a human viewpoint. He likely had in mind that man’s concept of perfection is limited. In contrast, God’s commandment has no such limit. Its guidance applies to all aspects of life. “To all perfection I see a limit,” reads the <em>New International Version, </em>“but your commands are boundless.”</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 119:96)</strong> I have seen a limit to all perfection, But your commandment has no limit.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “is very broad.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***sn song 69 Make Me Know Your Ways***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 69</p>
<h1><strong>Make Me Know Your Ways</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Psalm 25:4</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. We’re gathered together Jehovah, our God,</p>
<p class="p5">Accepting your warm invitation.</p>
<p class="p6">Your Word is a lamp that lights up our roadway,</p>
<p class="p7">The source of divine education.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">Teach me your ways, and make me understand;</p>
<p class="p10">Incline my ear to hear your wise command.</p>
<p class="p11">Cause me to walk in ways of truth and right,</p>
<p class="p12">And make your law my principal delight.</p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. Unreachably high is your wisdom, O God;</p>
<p class="p14">Your judgments we find reassuring.</p>
<p class="p15">Your Word is a source of unending wonder;</p>
<p class="p16">Your sayings of truth are enduring.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">Teach me your ways, and make me understand;</p>
<p class="p19">Incline my ear to hear your wise command.</p>
<p class="p20">Cause me to walk in ways of truth and right,</p>
<p class="p21">And make your law my principal delight.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p22">(See also <span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Ex. 33:13;</a><span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44"> Ps. 1:2;</a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> 119:27,</a><span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46"> 35,</a><span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47"> 73,</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> 105</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Ps. 25:4)</strong></a> Make me know your ways, O Jehovah; Teach me your paths.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Ex. 33:13)</strong></a> Please, if I have found favor in your eyes, make me know your ways, so that I may know you and continue to find favor in your eyes. Consider, too, that this nation is your people.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Ps. 1:2)</strong></a> But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone* day and night.</p><p></p><p>Or “he meditates on His law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:27)</strong></a> Make me understand the meaning* of your orders, So that I may ponder over* your wonderful works.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “way.”</p><p>Or “study.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:35)</strong></a> Guide me* in the pathway of your commandments, For in it I take delight.</p><p></p><p>Or “Make me walk.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:73)</strong></a> Your hands made me and formed me. Give me understanding, So that I may learn your commandments.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:105)</strong></a> Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***yb16 p. 59-p. 62 par. 3 Asia and the Middle East***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p9">for just three years and concentrate on your career? After that, you can start studying again.”</p>
<p class="p10">The woman replied: “I have waited 24 years to find Jehovah. Why would I put off learning about him for another three years?”</p>
<p class="p11">The very week she was to join the Theocratic Ministry School, a film company contacted her. They offered her a lucrative four-year contract on the condition that she accept any movie role she was given. She declined the offer. In May 2014, she qualified as an unbaptized publisher, and as August approached, she decided that she would preach 100 hours that month. When asked the reason why, she said, “I want to celebrate the 100-year rule of Jesus by preaching one hour for every year he’s been ruling!” She achieved her goal. In January 2015, she was baptized, and she now serves as an auxiliary pioneer.</p>
<h2><strong>Making the Best of a Night in Prison</strong></h2>
<p class="p13">In <strong>Sri Lanka, </strong>four sisters set off by bus to preach in an unassigned territory that was predominantly Buddhist. On their second day of preaching, a monk and a taxi driver accosted the sisters. Soon an angry crowd of about 30 people surrounded them. The police arrived, took the sisters to the police station, and held them overnight in prison cells, even though no charge of any wrongdoing was made. They were put with hardened criminals and were subjected to verbal abuse and filthy language, yet their presence in the prison opened opportunities to give a witness. One of the sisters said: “I was confined with murderers, but I was able to talk to them about the truth. They were surprised that I was there, and they had many questions about my beliefs. One person even asked me, ‘Why are you so happy?’”</p>
<p class="p14">The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka has accepted our submission for a fundamental rights case against the police for holding prisoners without a valid charge. The case is still pending.</p>
<h2><strong>Help for a Bedridden Woman</strong></h2>
<p class="p16">Michiko, a pioneer sister in <strong>Japan, </strong>was conducting a study in sign language with an elderly woman in a hospital. The sister asked the staff if there were any other patients with whom she could talk. Michiko then met Kazumi, who could hear but could not speak. Kazumi was bedridden following a car accident at the age of 23 and was unable to swallow food or even drink water. She had many questions and readily accepted a Bible study.</p>
<p class="p17">Michiko asked the questions, and Kazumi used her hands to point to the answers in the paragraphs or to write them out. When Kazumi obtained a cell phone, Michiko was able to consider the day’s text with her each morning. Although Kazumi weakened physically, she kept growing spiritually to the point of expressing a desire to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. At the age of 61, after studying for 13 years, Kazumi finally became an unbaptized publisher.</p>
<p class="p18">Because Kazumi is bedridden, the congregation arranged for her to listen in to all the meetings and assembly programs. Various sisters in the congregation read Kazumi’s prepared comments at the meetings.</p>
<p class="p19">Kazumi writes warm, upbuilding letters that are tailor-made for each Bible student who attends the meetings. She witnesses to the hospital staff and to those who visit her. Kazumi tells them, “If you study the Bible, you will be happy.”</p>
<h2><strong>A Monk Learns the Truth</strong></h2>
<p class="p21">In a <strong>Southeast Asian country, </strong>a sister went to an optician at a hospital, where she met a monk. She asked him, “Would you like to have perfect health and live forever in a beautiful place?” A friendly discussion ensued,</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***ia pp. 200-204 He Learned Forgiveness From the Master***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>15, 16. </strong>Explain how Jesus’ prophecy about three denials was fulfilled.</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>In the firelight, the girl who had admitted Peter at the gate was able to see him better. She recognized him. She said accusingly: “You, too, were with Jesus the Galilean!” Caught off guard, Peter denied knowing Jesus<wbr />—or even understanding what the girl was talking about. He went to stand near the gatehouse, trying to be inconspicuous, but another girl noticed him and pointed out the same fact: “This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.” Peter swore: “I do not know the man!” (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Matt. 26:69-72;</a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> Mark 14:66-68</a>) Perhaps it was after this second denial that Peter heard a cock crowing, but he was too distracted to be reminded of the prophecy Jesus had uttered just hours earlier.</p>
<p class="p21"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A little while later, Peter was still trying desperately to escape notice. But a group of people standing around in the courtyard approached. One of them was related to Malchus, the slave whom Peter had wounded. He said to Peter: “I saw you in the garden with him, did I not?” Peter felt driven to convince them that they were wrong. So he swore to the matter, evidently saying that a curse should come upon him if he was lying. That was Peter’s third denial. No sooner were the words out of his mouth than a cock crowed<wbr />—the second one Peter heard that night.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">John 18:26, 27;</a><span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52"> Mark 14:71, 72</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>17, 18. </strong>(a) How did Peter react when it dawned on him how terribly he had failed his Master? (b) What may Peter have wondered?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Jesus had just come out onto a balcony overlooking the courtyard. In that moment, described at the outset of this chapter, his eyes met Peter’s. It dawned on Peter just how terribly he had failed his Master. Peter left the courtyard, crushed by the weight of his own guilt. He headed into the streets of the city, his way lit by the sinking full moon. The tears welled up. The sights swam before his eyes. He broke down and wept bitterly.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Mark 14:72;</a><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"> Luke 22:61, 62</a>.</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>In the wake of such a failure, it is all too easy for a person to assume that his sin is too terrible for forgiveness to be possible. Peter may have wondered as much himself. Was it so?</p>
<h2><strong>Was Peter Beyond Forgiveness?</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>19. </strong>How must Peter have felt about his failure, yet how do we know that he did not give in to despair?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>It is hard to imagine the depth of Peter’s pain as the morning broke and the events of the day unfolded. How he must have reproved himself when Jesus died later that day after hours of torment! Peter must have shuddered to think of how he had added to his Master’s pain on what turned out to be the last day of His life as a man. Deep though the abyss of his sadness surely was, Peter did not give in to despair. We know as much because we soon find him in association with his spiritual brothers again. (<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Luke 24:33</a>) No doubt all the apostles regretted how they had behaved on that dark night, and they brought one another a measure of comfort.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20. </strong>What can we learn from Peter’s actions in one of his finer moments?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>In a way, we here see Peter in one of his finer moments. When a servant of God falls, what matters most is not the depth of his fall but the strength of his determination to get up again, to set matters right. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"><strong><em>Proverbs 24:16</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>Peter showed genuine faith by gathering with his brothers despite his low spirits. When one is burdened by sadness or regret, isolation is tempting but dangerous. (<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Prov. 18:1</a>) The wise course is to stay close to fellow believers and regain spiritual strength.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Heb. 10:24, 25</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>21. </strong>Because he had gathered with his spiritual brothers, what news did Peter hear?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Because he was with his spiritual brothers, Peter got to hear the shocking news that Jesus’ body was not in the tomb. Peter and John ran to the tomb where Jesus had been buried and the entrance had been sealed. John, likely a younger man, arrived first. Finding the entrance of the tomb open, he hesitated. Not Peter. Though he was winded, he went straight in. It was empty!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">John 20:3-9</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>22. </strong>What caused all traces of sadness and doubt in Peter’s heart to melt away?</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Did Peter believe that Jesus had been resurrected? Not at first, even though faithful women reported that angels had appeared to them to announce that Jesus had risen from the dead. (<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Luke 23:55–24:11</a>) But by the end of that day, all traces of sadness and doubt in Peter’s heart had melted away. Jesus lived, now a mighty spirit! He appeared to all his apostles. He did something else first, though, something private. The apostles said that day: “For a fact the Lord was raised up and he appeared to Simon!” (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Luke 24:34</a>) Similarly, the apostle Paul later wrote about that remarkable day when Jesus “appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.” (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">1 Cor. 15:5</a>) Cephas and Simon are other names for Peter. Jesus appeared to him that day<wbr />—evidently when Peter was alone.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p65">Peter gave his Master much to forgive, but who of us does not need forgiveness every day?</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"><strong>23. </strong>Why do Christians today who fall into sin need to remember Peter’s case?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The details of that touching reunion are left unrecorded in the Bible. They remain between Jesus and Peter. We can only imagine how moved Peter was to see his beloved Lord alive again and to have an opportunity to express his sorrow and repentance. More than anything in the world, Peter wanted forgiveness. Who can doubt that Jesus extended it, and in abundance at that? Christians today who fall into sin need to remember Peter’s case. Never should we assume that we are beyond the reach of divine forgiveness. Jesus perfectly reflects his Father, who “will forgive in a large way.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Isa. 55:7</a>.</p>
<h2><strong>Further Proof of Forgiveness</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>24, 25. </strong>(a) Describe Peter’s night of fishing on the Sea of Galilee. (b) What was Peter’s reaction to Jesus’ miracle the next morning?</p>
<p class="p31"><strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Jesus told his apostles to go to Galilee, where they would meet him again. When they arrived, Peter decided to go out fishing on the Sea of Galilee. Several others accompanied him. Once again, Peter found himself on the lake where he had spent much of his earlier life. The creaking of the boat, the lapping of the waves, the feel of the coarse nets in his hands must all have seemed comfortingly familiar. The men caught no fish all that night.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Matt. 26:32;</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> John 21:1-3</a>.</p>
<p class="p32"><strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>At dawn, though, a figure called from the shore and urged the fishermen to cast their nets on the other side of the boat. They complied and pulled in a great catch of 153 fish! Peter knew who that person was. He leaped from the boat and swam ashore. On the beach, Jesus gave his faithful friends a meal of fish cooked over charcoal. He focused on Peter.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">John 21:4-14</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>26, 27. </strong>(a) What opportunity did Jesus give Peter three times? (b) Jesus provided what proof of his full forgiveness of Peter?</p>
<p class="p33"><strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Jesus asked Peter if he loved his Lord “more than these”<wbr />—evidently pointing to the large haul of fish. In Peter’s heart, would love for the fishing business compete with love for Jesus? Just as Peter had denied his Lord three times, Jesus now gave him the opportunity to affirm his love three times before his fellows. As Peter did so, Jesus told him how to show that love: by putting sacred service ahead of all else, feeding, strengthening, and shepherding Christ’s flock, His faithful followers.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Luke 22:32;</a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> John 21:15-17</a>.</p>
<p class="p34"><strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Jesus thus confirmed that Peter was still useful to him and to his Father. Peter would play a valuable role in the congregation under Christ’s direction. What powerful proof of Jesus’ full forgiveness! Surely that mercy touched Peter, and he took it to heart.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>28. </strong>How did Peter come to live up to his name?</p>
<p class="p35"><strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Peter faithfully carried out his assignment for many years. He strengthened his brothers, as Jesus had commanded on the eve of His death. Peter worked kindly and patiently at shepherding and feeding Christ’s followers. The man called Simon came to live up to the name that Jesus had given him<wbr />—Peter, or Rock—<wbr />by becoming a steady, strong, reliable force for good in the congregation. Much evidence to that effect is found in the two warm, personal letters Peter wrote that became valuable books of the Bible. Those letters show, too, that Peter never forgot the lesson he had learned from Jesus about forgiveness.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69"><strong><em>1 Peter 3:8, 9;</em></strong></a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> <strong><em>4:8</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>29. </strong>How can we imitate the faith of Peter and the mercy of his Master?</p>
<p class="p36"><strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>May we learn that lesson as well. Do we daily ask God’s forgiveness for our many errors? Do we then accept that forgiveness and believe in its power to cleanse us? And do we extend forgiveness to those around us? If we do, we will imitate the faith of Peter<wbr />—and the mercy of his Master.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 26:69-72)</strong> Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard, and a servant girl came up to him and said: “You too were with Jesus the Gal·i·leʹan!” <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>But he denied it before them all, saying: “I do not know what you are talking about.” <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>When he went out to the gatehouse, another girl noticed him and said to those there: “This man was with Jesus the Naz·a·reneʹ.” <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>Again he denied it, with an oath: “I do not know the man!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:66-68)</strong> Now while Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>On seeing Peter warming himself, she looked straight at him and said: “You too were with the Naz·a·reneʹ, this Jesus.” <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>But he denied it, saying: “Neither do I know him nor do I understand what you are talking about,” and he went outside to the entryway.*</p><p></p><p>Or “vestibule.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(John 18:26, 27)</strong> One of the slaves of the high priest, who was a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, said: “I saw you in the garden with him, did I not?” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>However, Peter denied it again, and immediately a rooster crowed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:71, 72)</strong> But he started to curse and swear: “I do not know this man of whom you speak!” <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>Immediately a rooster crowed a second time, and Peter recalled what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows twice, you will disown me three times.” And he broke down and began to weep.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Mark 14:72)</strong> Immediately a rooster crowed a second time, and Peter recalled what Jesus had said to him: “Before a rooster crows twice, you will disown me three times.” And he broke down and began to weep.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:61, 62)</strong> At this the Lord turned and looked straight at Peter, and Peter recalled the statement of the Lord when he had said to him: “Before a rooster crows today, you will disown me three times.” <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>And he went outside and wept bitterly.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Luke 24:33)</strong> And they got up in that very hour and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the Eleven and those assembled together with them,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 24:16)</strong> For the righteous one may fall seven times, and he will get up again, But the wicked will be made to stumble by calamity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 18:1)</strong> Whoever isolates himself pursues his own selfish desires; He rejects* all practical wisdom.</p><p></p><p>Or “shows contempt for.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(John 20:3-9)</strong> Then Peter and the other disciple set out for the tomb. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The two of them began running together, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter and reached the tomb first. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Stooping forward, he saw the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Then Simon Peter also came, following him, and he went into the tomb. And he saw the linen cloths lying there. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The cloth that had been on his head was not lying with the other cloth bands but was rolled up in a place by itself. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then the other disciple who had reached the tomb first also went in, and he saw and believed. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For they did not yet understand the scripture that he must rise from the dead.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(Luke 23:55-24:11)</strong> But the women who had come with him from Galʹi·lee followed along and took a look at the tomb* and saw how his body was laid, <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>and they went back to prepare spices and perfumed oils. But, of course, they rested on the Sabbath according to the commandment. </p><p><strong>24 </strong>But on the first day of the week, they came very early to the tomb,* bringing the spices they had prepared. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>But they found the stone rolled away from the tomb,* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>While they were perplexed about this, look! two men in shining garments stood by them. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The women became frightened and kept their faces turned toward the ground, so the men said to them: “Why are you looking for the living one among the dead? <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He is not here, but has been raised up. Recall how he spoke to you while he was yet in Galʹi·lee, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>saying that the Son of man must be handed over to sinful men and be executed on the stake and on the third day rise.” <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then they remembered his words, <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>and they returned from the tomb* and reported all these things to the Eleven and to all the rest. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They were Mary Magʹda·lene, Jo·anʹna, and Mary the mother of James. Also, the rest of the women with them were telling these things to the apostles. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>However, these sayings seemed like nonsense to them, and they would not believe the women.</p><p></p><p>Or “memorial tomb.”</p><p>Or “memorial tomb.”</p><p>Or “memorial tomb.”</p><p>Or “memorial tomb.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(Luke 24:34)</strong> who said: “For a fact the Lord was raised up, and he appeared to Simon!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 15:5)</strong> and that he appeared to Ceʹphas,* and then to the Twelve.</p><p></p><p>Also called Peter.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 23</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 55:7)</strong> Let the wicked man leave his way And the evil man his thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him, To our God, for he will forgive in a large way.*</p><p></p><p>Or “will freely forgive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 24</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 26:32)</strong> But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of you into Galʹi·lee.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 24</span></a> <strong>(John 21:1-3)</strong> After this Jesus manifested himself* again to the disciples, at the Sea of Ti·beʹri·as. He made the manifestation in this way. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>There were together Simon Peter, Thomas (who was called the Twin), Na·thanʹa·el from Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, the sons of Zebʹe·dee, and two others of his disciples. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Simon Peter said to them: “I am going fishing.” They said to him: “We are coming with you.” They went out and got aboard the boat, but during that night they caught nothing.</p><p></p><p>Or “appeared.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 25</span></a> <strong>(John 21:4-14)</strong> However, just as day was breaking, Jesus stood on the beach, but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then Jesus said to them: “Children, you do not have anything* to eat, do you?” They answered: “No!” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He said to them: “Cast the net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.” So they cast it, but they were not able to haul it in because of the large number of fish. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter: “It is the Lord!” Now Simon Peter, on hearing that it was the Lord, put on* his outer garment, for he was naked,* and plunged into the sea. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But the other disciples came in the small boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not a long way from land, only about 300 feet* away. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When they came ashore, they saw there a charcoal fire with fish lying on it and bread. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Jesus said to them: “Bring some of the fish you just now caught.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So Simon Peter went on board and hauled the net ashore full of big fish, 153 of them. And though there were so many, the net did not burst. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Jesus said to them: “Come, have your breakfast.” Not one of the disciples had the courage to ask him: “Who are you?” because they knew it was the Lord. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the same with the fish. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>This was now the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after being raised up from the dead.</p><p></p><p>Or “any fish.”</p><p>Or “girded about himself.”</p><p>Or “lightly clad.”</p><p>About 90 m. Lit., “about 200 cubits.” See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 26</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:32)</strong> But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 26</span></a> <strong>(John 21:15-17)</strong> When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” He replied to him: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Feed my lambs.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Again he said to him a second time: “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He replied: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Shepherd my little sheep.” <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He said to him a third time: “Simon son of John, do you have affection for me?” Peter became grieved that he asked him the third time: “Do you have affection for me?” So he said to him: “Lord, you are aware of all things; you know that I have affection for you.” Jesus said to him: “Feed my little sheep.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 28</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 3:8, 9)</strong> Finally, all of you have unity of mind,* fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not pay back injury for injury or insult for insult. Instead, repay with a blessing, for you were called to this course, so that you might inherit a blessing.</p><p></p><p>Or “think in agreement.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 28</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 4:8)</strong> Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***ia chap. 23 He Learned Forgiveness From the Master***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>TO THINK ABOUT . . .</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p38">  How did Peter display a faulty view of forgiveness?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p39">  In what ways did Peter test Jesus’ forgiveness?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p40">  How did Jesus show forgiveness toward Peter?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p41">  In what ways would you like to imitate Peter’s faith and Jesus’ mercy?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016322.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***sn song 13 A Prayer of Thanksgiving***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 13</p>
<h1><strong>A Prayer of Thanksgiving</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Psalm 95:2</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Gracious Jehovah, deserving of praise,</p>
<p class="p5">To you, O Sov’reign, our voices we raise.</p>
<p class="p6">We bow to you, O Great Hearer of prayer,</p>
<p class="p7">Placing ourselves under your tender care.</p>
<p class="p8">Daily our errors reveal we are weak;</p>
<p class="p9">For our transgressions forgiveness we seek.</p>
<p class="p10">Look! with the blood of your Son we were bought.</p>
<p class="p11">Now our desire is by you to be taught.</p>
<p class="p12">2. Happy are those whom you choose to invite</p>
<p class="p13">Into your courts of instruction and light.</p>
<p class="p14">Teach us to know you; your Word is our guide.</p>
<p class="p15">Here in your temple, we wish to reside.</p>
<p class="p16">Awesome indeed is your powerful hand,</p>
<p class="p17">Giving your servants the courage to stand.</p>
<p class="p18">God of salvation, your Kingdom we hail.</p>
<p class="p19">Preach it we must, for it never will fail.</p>
<p class="p20">3. May your attention cause joy to abound;</p>
<p class="p21">In all the earth let your worship be found.</p>
<p class="p22">Crowned with your goodness, your Kingdom appears,</p>
<p class="p23">Wiping out sickness, death, sorrow, and tears.</p>
<p class="p24">All that is wicked, your Son will destroy;</p>
<p class="p25">Blessed creation will cry out for joy.</p>
<p class="p26">Shouting in triumph, oh, thanks let us sing:</p>
<p class="p27">“Praise to Jehovah, our glorious King!”</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Ps. 65:2,</a><span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73"> 4,</a><span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74"> 11;</a><span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75"> Phil. 4:6</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Ps. 95:2)</strong></a> Let us come into his presence* with thanksgiving; Let us sing and shout in triumph to him.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “before his face.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Ps. 65:2)</strong></a> O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(Ps. 65:4)</strong></a> Happy is the one whom you choose and bring near To reside in your courtyards. We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house, Your holy temple.*</p><p></p><p>Or “sanctuary.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(Ps. 65:11)</strong></a> You crown the year with your goodness; Your tracks overflow with abundance.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “drip with fatness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(Phil. 4:6)</strong></a> Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God;</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
