<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 “My Help Comes From Jehovah”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016326.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 120:0-134:3)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A Song of the Ascents.* <strong>120 </strong>I called to Jehovah in my distress, And he answered me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, rescue me* from lying lips And from the deceitful tongue.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>What will He do to you, and how will He punish you,* You deceitful tongue?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With sharp arrows of a warrior And burning coals of broomwood.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech! I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have* been dwelling far too long With those who hate peace.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I am for peace, but when I speak, They are for war. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>121 </strong>I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you in all you do* From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>122 </strong>I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And now our feet are standing Within your gates, O Jerusalem.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jerusalem is built as a city That is joined together as one.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The tribes have gone up to it, The tribes of Jah,* According to the reminder to Israel, To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For thrones for judgment were set up there, Thrones of the house of David.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Ask for the peace of Jerusalem. Those who love you, O city, will be secure.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>May peace continue within your ramparts,* Security within your fortified towers.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say: “May there be peace within you.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God, I will seek good for you. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>123 </strong>To you I raise my eyes, You who are enthroned in the heavens.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress, So our eyes look to Jehovah our God Until he shows us favor.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor, For we have had our full share of contempt.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have had our full share of* ridicule from the self-assured And the contempt of the arrogant. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>124 </strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us When men rose up to attack us,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then they would have swallowed us up alive When their anger was burning against us.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then the waters would have washed us away, The torrent would have swept over us.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, For he has not given us as prey to their teeth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>We are* like a bird that escaped From the hunter’s trap; The trap was broken, And we escaped.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Our help is in the name of Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>125 </strong>Those who trust in Jehovah Are like Mount Zion, which cannot be shaken But endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Just as mountains surround Jerusalem, So Jehovah surrounds his people From now on and forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous, So that the righteous do not turn to doing* what is wrong.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good, To those who are upright in heart.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>126 </strong>When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion, We thought we were dreaming.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At that time our mouth was filled with laughter And our tongue with a joyful shout. At that time they said among the nations: “Jehovah has done great things for them.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah has done great things for us, And we are overjoyed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do gather back* our captives, O Jehovah, Like streams in the Negʹeb.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Those sowing seed with tears Will reap with a joyful shout.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The one who does go out, though weeping, Carrying his bag of seed, Will surely return with a joyful shout, Carrying in his sheaves. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of Solomon. <strong>127 </strong>Unless Jehovah builds the house, It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, It is in vain that the guard stays awake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is in vain that you rise up early, That you stay up late, That you toil for your food, Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>128 </strong>Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, Who walks in His ways.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house; Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! That is how the man who fears Jehovah Will be blessed.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>129 </strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me; But they have not defeated me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Plowmen have plowed across my back; They have made their furrows long.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jehovah is righteous; He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace, All those who hate Zion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will become like grass on the rooftops That withers before it is pulled up,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>That cannot fill the reaper’s hand Nor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you; We bless you in the name of Jehovah.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>130 </strong>From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, hear my voice. May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>If errors were what you watch,* O Jah,* Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I hope in Jehovah, my whole being* hopes in him; I wait for his word.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I eagerly wait* for Jehovah, More than watchmen wait for the morning, Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah, For Jehovah is loyal in his love, And he has great power to redeem.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will redeem Israel from all their errors. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>131 </strong>O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, Nor are my eyes lofty; Nor do I aspire to things too great, Or to things that are beyond me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>No, but I have calmed and quieted my soul* Like a weaned child with its mother; I am* contented like a weaned child.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let Israel wait for Jehovah From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>132 </strong>O Jehovah, remember David And all his suffering;  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>How he swore to Jehovah, How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob:  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“I will not go into my tent, my home. I will not lie upon my couch, my bed;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will not allow my eyes to sleep, Nor my eyelids to slumber  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Until I find a place for Jehovah, A fine residence* for the Powerful One of Jacob.”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah; We found it in the fields of the forest.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let us come into his residence;* Let us bow down at his footstool.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place, You and the Ark of your strength.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>May your priests be clothed with righteousness, And may your loyal ones shout joyfully. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the sake of David your servant, Do not reject* your anointed one. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn to David; He will surely not go back on his word: “One of your offspring,* I will place on your throne. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If your sons keep my covenant And my reminders that I teach them, Their sons too Will sit on your throne forever.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For Jehovah has chosen Zion; He has desired it for his dwelling place: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“This is my resting-place forever; Here I will dwell, for this is my desire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will richly bless it with provisions; I will satisfy its poor with bread. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Its priests I will clothe with salvation, And its loyal ones will shout joyfully. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>There I will make the strength* of David grow. I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>I will clothe his enemies with shame, But the crown* on his head will flourish.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>133 </strong>Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>134 </strong>Praise Jehovah, All you servants of Jehovah, You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Raise your hands in holiness* And praise Jehovah.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth, Bless you from Zion.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “and what will He add to you?”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “totter.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “your going out and your coming in.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “fortified walls.”</p><p>Or “Our soul has had more than enough.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “Our soul is.”</p><p>Or “turn their hands to.”</p><p>Or “restore.”</p><p>Or “wadis in the south.”</p><p>Or “Children.”</p><p>Or “keep track of.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul eagerly waits.”</p><p>Or “myself.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Or “A grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Or “his grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Lit., “turn back the face of.”</p><p>Lit., “of the fruit of your womb.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “diadem.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in the sanctuary.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016326.xhtml#citationsource2">^ <strong>(Pss. 120:0-134:3)</strong></a> <span id="citation2"></span>A Song of the Ascents.* <strong>120 </strong>I called to Jehovah in my distress, And he answered me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, rescue me* from lying lips And from the deceitful tongue.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>What will He do to you, and how will He punish you,* You deceitful tongue?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With sharp arrows of a warrior And burning coals of broomwood.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech! I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have* been dwelling far too long With those who hate peace.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I am for peace, but when I speak, They are for war. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>121 </strong>I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you in all you do* From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>122 </strong>I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And now our feet are standing Within your gates, O Jerusalem.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jerusalem is built as a city That is joined together as one.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The tribes have gone up to it, The tribes of Jah,* According to the reminder to Israel, To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For thrones for judgment were set up there, Thrones of the house of David.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Ask for the peace of Jerusalem. Those who love you, O city, will be secure.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>May peace continue within your ramparts,* Security within your fortified towers.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say: “May there be peace within you.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God, I will seek good for you. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>123 </strong>To you I raise my eyes, You who are enthroned in the heavens.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress, So our eyes look to Jehovah our God Until he shows us favor.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor, For we have had our full share of contempt.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have had our full share of* ridicule from the self-assured And the contempt of the arrogant. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>124 </strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us When men rose up to attack us,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then they would have swallowed us up alive When their anger was burning against us.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then the waters would have washed us away, The torrent would have swept over us.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, For he has not given us as prey to their teeth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>We are* like a bird that escaped From the hunter’s trap; The trap was broken, And we escaped.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Our help is in the name of Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>125 </strong>Those who trust in Jehovah Are like Mount Zion, which cannot be shaken But endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Just as mountains surround Jerusalem, So Jehovah surrounds his people From now on and forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous, So that the righteous do not turn to doing* what is wrong.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good, To those who are upright in heart.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>126 </strong>When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion, We thought we were dreaming.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At that time our mouth was filled with laughter And our tongue with a joyful shout. At that time they said among the nations: “Jehovah has done great things for them.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah has done great things for us, And we are overjoyed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do gather back* our captives, O Jehovah, Like streams in the Negʹeb.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Those sowing seed with tears Will reap with a joyful shout.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The one who does go out, though weeping, Carrying his bag of seed, Will surely return with a joyful shout, Carrying in his sheaves. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of Solomon. <strong>127 </strong>Unless Jehovah builds the house, It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, It is in vain that the guard stays awake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is in vain that you rise up early, That you stay up late, That you toil for your food, Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>128 </strong>Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, Who walks in His ways.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house; Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! That is how the man who fears Jehovah Will be blessed.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>129 </strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me; But they have not defeated me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Plowmen have plowed across my back; They have made their furrows long.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jehovah is righteous; He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace, All those who hate Zion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will become like grass on the rooftops That withers before it is pulled up,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>That cannot fill the reaper’s hand Nor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you; We bless you in the name of Jehovah.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>130 </strong>From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, hear my voice. May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>If errors were what you watch,* O Jah,* Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I hope in Jehovah, my whole being* hopes in him; I wait for his word.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I eagerly wait* for Jehovah, More than watchmen wait for the morning, Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah, For Jehovah is loyal in his love, And he has great power to redeem.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will redeem Israel from all their errors. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>131 </strong>O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, Nor are my eyes lofty; Nor do I aspire to things too great, Or to things that are beyond me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>No, but I have calmed and quieted my soul* Like a weaned child with its mother; I am* contented like a weaned child.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let Israel wait for Jehovah From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>132 </strong>O Jehovah, remember David And all his suffering;  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>How he swore to Jehovah, How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob:  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“I will not go into my tent, my home. I will not lie upon my couch, my bed;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will not allow my eyes to sleep, Nor my eyelids to slumber  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Until I find a place for Jehovah, A fine residence* for the Powerful One of Jacob.”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah; We found it in the fields of the forest.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let us come into his residence;* Let us bow down at his footstool.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place, You and the Ark of your strength.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>May your priests be clothed with righteousness, And may your loyal ones shout joyfully. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the sake of David your servant, Do not reject* your anointed one. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn to David; He will surely not go back on his word: “One of your offspring,* I will place on your throne. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If your sons keep my covenant And my reminders that I teach them, Their sons too Will sit on your throne forever.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For Jehovah has chosen Zion; He has desired it for his dwelling place: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“This is my resting-place forever; Here I will dwell, for this is my desire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will richly bless it with provisions; I will satisfy its poor with bread. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Its priests I will clothe with salvation, And its loyal ones will shout joyfully. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>There I will make the strength* of David grow. I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>I will clothe his enemies with shame, But the crown* on his head will flourish.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>133 </strong>Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>134 </strong>Praise Jehovah, All you servants of Jehovah, You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Raise your hands in holiness* And praise Jehovah.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth, Bless you from Zion.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “and what will He add to you?”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “totter.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “your going out and your coming in.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “fortified walls.”</p><p>Or “Our soul has had more than enough.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “Our soul is.”</p><p>Or “turn their hands to.”</p><p>Or “restore.”</p><p>Or “wadis in the south.”</p><p>Or “Children.”</p><p>Or “keep track of.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul eagerly waits.”</p><p>Or “myself.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Or “A grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Or “his grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Lit., “turn back the face of.”</p><p>Lit., “of the fruit of your womb.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “diadem.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in the sanctuary.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
