<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 9/16 Sample Presentations</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016321.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 16 What Does the Bible Say?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl"><strong>What Does the Bible Say?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>What is the Kingdom of God?</strong></h2>
<p class="p3"><strong>SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE </strong>that it represents the reign of God in a person’s heart; others think that it is the product of human efforts to bring world peace and brotherhood. What do you think?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p5">“The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. . . . It will crush and put an end to all these [human] kingdoms.” (<span id="citationsource4"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation4">Daniel 2:44</a>) God’s Kingdom is a real government.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  The Kingdom of God rules from heaven.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource5"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation5">Matthew 10:7;</a><span id="citationsource6"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation6"> Luke 10:9</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  God uses the Kingdom to accomplish his will in heaven and on earth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource7"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation7">Matthew 6:10</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>When will God’s Kingdom come?</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>WHAT WOULD YOU SAY?</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p11">  No one knows</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p12">  Soon</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p13">  Never</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p14"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p15">“This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.” (<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">Matthew 24:14</a>) Once the good news has been fully preached, the Kingdom will come to bring the present wicked system to an end.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p17">  No one on earth knows exactly when God’s Kingdom will come.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Matthew 24:36</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">  Bible prophecy shows that the Kingdom will come soon.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Matthew 24:3,</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> 7,</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 12</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="relatedContent"><p class="p19">For more information, see chapter 8 of this book, <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em><em>, </em>published by Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
<p class="p20">Also available at www.jw.org</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation4"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource4">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong></a> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation5"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource5">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:7)</strong></a> As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation6"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource6">^ <strong>(Luke 10:9)</strong></a> and cure the sick ones in it and tell them: ‘The Kingdom of God has come near to you.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation7"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:10)</strong></a> Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong></a> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:36)</strong></a> “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong></a> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:7)</strong></a> “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:12)</strong></a> and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
