<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 Who Is the Most Important Person in Your Life?</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016251.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 79:0-86:17)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>79 </strong>O God, the nations have invaded your inheritance; They have defiled your holy temple; They have turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the heavens And the flesh of your loyal ones to the wild beasts of the earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They have poured out their blood like water around Jerusalem, And no one is left to bury them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have become an object of reproach to our neighbors; Those around us ridicule and jeer us.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>How long, O Jehovah, will you be furious? Forever? How long will your indignation burn just like fire?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know you And on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For they have devoured Jacob And have desolated his homeland.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not hold us accountable for the errors of our ancestors. Quickly show us your mercy, For we have been brought very low.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Help us, O God of our salvation, For the sake of your glorious name; Rescue us and forgive* our sins for the sake of your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?” Before our eyes may it become known among the nations That the shed blood of your servants has been avenged. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May you hear the sighing of the prisoner. Use your great power* to preserve* those sentenced to death.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Repay our neighbors sevenfold For the taunts they have leveled at you, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Then we, your people and the flock of your pasture, Will give thanks to you forever; And we will declare your praise from generation to generation. </p><p>To the director; set to “The Lilies.” A reminder. Of Aʹsaph. A melody. <strong>80 </strong>O Shepherd of Israel, listen, You who are guiding Joseph just like a flock. You who sit enthroned above* the cherubs, Shine forth.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before Eʹphra·im and Benjamin and Ma·nasʹseh, Do stir up your mightiness; Come and save us.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>O God, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah God of armies, how long will you be hostile toward* the prayer of your people?  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You feed them tears as their bread, And you make them drink tears beyond measure.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You let our neighbors quarrel over us; Our enemies keep mocking us as they please.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You made a vine depart from Egypt. You drove out the nations and planted it.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You cleared a space for it, And it took root and filled the land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The mountains were covered by its shadow, And the cedars of God by its branches. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Its branches reached as far as the sea, And its shoots to the River.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Why have you broken down the stone walls of the vineyard, So that all those passing by pluck its fruit? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The boars of the forest ravage it, And the wild animals of the field feed on it. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God of armies, please return. Look down from heaven and see! Take care of this vine, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The stock* that your right hand has planted, And look upon the son whom* you made strong for yourself. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>It is burned with fire, cut down. They perish at your rebuke.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May your hand give support to the man at your right hand, To the son of man you have made strong for yourself. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Then we will not turn away from you. Preserve us alive, so that we may call on your name. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved. </p><p>To the director; upon the Gitʹtith.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>81 </strong>Shout joyfully to God our strength. Shout in triumph to the God of Jacob.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Begin the music and take a tambourine, The melodious harp together with the stringed instrument.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Blow the horn on the new moon, On the full moon, for the day of our festival.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For it is a decree for Israel, A ruling of the God of Jacob.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established it as a reminder for Joseph When He went out against the land of Egypt. I heard a voice* that I did not recognize:  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“I lifted the burden from his shoulder; His hands were freed from the basket.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In your distress you called, and I rescued you; I answered you from the thundercloud.* I tested you at the waters of Merʹi·bah.* (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Hear, my people, and I will testify against you. O Israel, if you would only listen to me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Among you, there will be no strange god, And you will not bow down to a foreign god. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>I, Jehovah, am your God, The one who brought you out of the land of Egypt. Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But my people did not listen to my voice; Israel would not submit to me. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So I let them follow their stubborn hearts; They did what they thought was right.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>If only my people would listen to me, If only Israel would walk in my ways! <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Their enemies I would quickly subdue; I would turn my hand against their adversaries. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Those who hate Jehovah will cringe in his presence, And their outcome* will be forever. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But he will feed you* with the finest* wheat And satisfy you with honey from the rock.” </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>82 </strong>God takes his place in the divine assembly;* In the middle of the gods* he judges:  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“How long will you continue to judge with injustice And show partiality to the wicked? (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Defend* the lowly and the fatherless. Render justice to the helpless and destitute.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Rescue the lowly and the poor; Save them out of the hand of the wicked.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They do not know, nor do they understand; They are walking about in darkness; All the foundations of the earth are being shaken.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“I have said, ‘You are gods,* All of you are sons of the Most High.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But you will die just as men do; And like any other prince you will fall!’”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O God, and judge the earth, For all the nations belong to you. </p><p>A song. A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>83 </strong>O God, do not be silent; Do not keep quiet* or still, O Divine One.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For look! your enemies are in an uproar; Those who hate you act arrogantly.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>With cunning they secretly plot against your people; They conspire against your treasured ones.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They devise a unified strategy;* They have made an alliance* against you—  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek, Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>As·syrʹi·a too has joined them; They give support to* the sons of Lot. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an, As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream* of Kiʹshon. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They were annihilated at En-dor; They became manure for the ground. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make their nobles like Oʹreb and Zeʹeb And their princes* like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O my God, make them like a whirling thistle,* Like stubble blown about by the wind. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like a fire that burns up the forest, Like a flame that scorches the mountains, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>So may you pursue them with your tempest And terrify them with your windstorm. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Cover* their faces with dishonor, So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May they be put to shame and be terrified forever; May they be disgraced and perish; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth. </p><p>For the director; upon the Gitʹtith.* Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. <strong>84 </strong>How lovely* your grand tabernacle is, O Jehovah of armies!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My whole being* yearns, Yes, I am faint with longing, For the courtyards of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh shout joyfully to the living God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Even the bird finds a home there And the swallow a nest for herself, Where she cares for her young Near your grand altar, O Jehovah of armies, My King and my God!  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Happy are those dwelling in your house! They continue to praise you. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy are the men who find their strength in you, Whose hearts are set on the highways.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>When they pass through the Baʹca Valley,* They make it into a place of springs; And the early rain clothes it* with blessings.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will walk on from strength to strength; Each one appears before God in Zion.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, hear my prayer; Listen, O God of Jacob. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Look, our shield and our God,* Look upon the face of your anointed one. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else! I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my God Rather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield; He gives favor and glory. Jehovah will not hold back anything good From those walking in integrity. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>O Jehovah of armies, Happy is the man who trusts in you. </p><p>For the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. <strong>85 </strong>You have shown favor, O Jehovah, to your land; You brought back those of Jacob who were taken captive.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You have pardoned the error of your people; You forgave* all their sin. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You held back all your fury; You turned away from your hot anger.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Restore us,* O God of our salvation, And set aside your displeasure with us.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Will you be furious with us forever? Will you prolong your anger to generation after generation?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Will you not revive us again So that your people may rejoice in you?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to us, O Jehovah, And grant us your salvation.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says, For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones, But let them not return to overconfidence.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him, So that his glory may reside in our land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together; Righteousness and peace will kiss each other. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Faithfulness will sprout from the earth, And righteousness will look down from the heavens. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, Jehovah will give what is good,* And our land will yield its harvest. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteousness will walk before him And make a path for his footsteps. </p><p>A prayer of David. <strong>86 </strong>Incline your ear,* O Jehovah, and answer me, For I am afflicted and poor.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Guard my life,* for I am loyal. Save your servant who is trusting in you, For you are my God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Make your servant* rejoice, For to you, O Jehovah, I turn.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer; And pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I call on you in the day of my distress, For you will answer me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah, There are no works like yours.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>All the nations that you made Will come and bow down before you, O Jehovah, And they will give glory to your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you are great and do wondrous things; You are God, you alone. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart* to fear your name. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart, And I will glorify your name forever, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For your loyal love toward me is great, And you have saved my life* from the depths of the Grave.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God, presumptuous men rise up against me; A band of ruthless men seek to take my life,* And they have no regard for you.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant, And save the son of your slave girl. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Show me a sign* of your goodness, So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame. For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or possibly, “set free.”</p><p>Lit., “the sons of death.”</p><p>Or possibly, “between.”</p><p>Or “Reveal your radiance.”</p><p>Lit., “fume against.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “main stem of the vine.”</p><p>Or “branch that.”</p><p>Lit., “the rebuke of your face.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “language.”</p><p>Lit., “in the hidden place of thunder.”</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Lit., “They walked in their counsels.”</p><p>Lit., “time.”</p><p>Lit., “him,” that is, God’s people.</p><p>Lit., “the fat of.”</p><p>Or “in the assembly of the Divine One.”</p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p><p>Or “Judge.”</p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p><p>Or “keep speechless.”</p><p>Or “raise their heads.”</p><p>Lit., “concealed ones.”</p><p>Lit., “They consult with a heart together.”</p><p>Or “a covenant.”</p><p>Lit., “have become an arm to.”</p><p>Or “wadi.”</p><p>Or “leaders.”</p><p>Or “like tumbleweed.”</p><p>Lit., “Fill.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “deeply loved.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Or “the valley of baca bushes.”</p><p>Or possibly, “And the instructor enwraps himself.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Look at our shield, O God.”</p><p>Lit., “covered.”</p><p>Or “Gather us back.”</p><p>Or “prosperity.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “the soul of your servant.”</p><p>Or “I raise my soul.”</p><p>Or “Give me an undivided heart.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “seek my soul.”</p><p>Or “have not set you in front of themselves.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “and truth.”</p><p>Or “evidence.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016251.xhtml#citationsource2">^ <strong>(Ps. 83:0-18)</strong></a> <span id="citation2"></span>A song. A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>83 </strong>O God, do not be silent; Do not keep quiet* or still, O Divine One.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For look! your enemies are in an uproar; Those who hate you act arrogantly.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>With cunning they secretly plot against your people; They conspire against your treasured ones.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They devise a unified strategy;* They have made an alliance* against you—  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek, Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>As·syrʹi·a too has joined them; They give support to* the sons of Lot. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an, As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream* of Kiʹshon. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They were annihilated at En-dor; They became manure for the ground. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make their nobles like Oʹreb and Zeʹeb And their princes* like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O my God, make them like a whirling thistle,* Like stubble blown about by the wind. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like a fire that burns up the forest, Like a flame that scorches the mountains, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>So may you pursue them with your tempest And terrify them with your windstorm. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Cover* their faces with dishonor, So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May they be put to shame and be terrified forever; May they be disgraced and perish; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “keep speechless.”</p><p>Or “raise their heads.”</p><p>Lit., “concealed ones.”</p><p>Lit., “They consult with a heart together.”</p><p>Or “a covenant.”</p><p>Lit., “have become an arm to.”</p><p>Or “wadi.”</p><p>Or “leaders.”</p><p>Or “like tumbleweed.”</p><p>Lit., “Fill.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
