<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 July 11-17</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016244.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 69:0-73:28)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of David. <strong>69 </strong>Save me, O God, for the waters threaten my life.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I have sunk down into the deep mud, where there is no solid ground. I have come into deep waters, And the rushing stream has swept me away.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I am exhausted from calling out; My throat has become hoarse. My eyes have grown weary while waiting for my God.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Those hating me without cause Are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me, My treacherous enemies,* have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>O God, you are aware of my foolishness, And my guilt is not hidden from you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May those hoping in you not be put to shame because of me, O Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies. May those seeking you not be humiliated because of me, O God of Israel.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I suffer reproach on your account; Humiliation covers my face.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I have become a stranger to my brothers, A foreigner to the sons of my mother.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Zeal for your house has consumed me, And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>When I humbled myself* with fasting,* I was reproached for it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became an object of scorn* to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I am the talk of those sitting in the city gate, And the drunkards make me the subject of their songs. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But may my prayer come to you, O Jehovah, at an acceptable time. In your abundant loyal love, O God, Answer me with your sure acts of salvation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Rescue me from the mire; Do not let me sink down. Rescue me from those who hate me And from the deep waters. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Do not let the rushing floodwaters sweep me away, Or let the deep swallow me, Or let the well* close its mouth over me. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Answer me, O Jehovah, for your loyal love is good. According to your abundant mercy turn toward me, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And do not hide your face from your servant. Answer me quickly, for I am in distress. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come near to me and rescue me;* Redeem me on account of my enemies. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>You know my reproach and my disgrace and my humiliation. You see all my foes. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Reproach has broken my heart, and the wound is incurable.* I was hoping for sympathy, but there was none, And for comforters, but I found none. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But for food they gave me poison,* And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Let their table become a trap for them, And their prosperity, a snare. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, And make their hips tremble constantly. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pour out upon them your indignation,* And may your burning anger overtake them. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Let their encampment* become desolate; Let there be no inhabitant in their tents. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For they pursue the one whom you struck, And they keep recounting the pains of those you wounded. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Add more guilt to their guilt, And may they have no share in your righteousness. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Let them be erased from the book of the living,* And may they not be enrolled among the righteous. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>But I am afflicted and in pain. May your saving power, O God, protect me. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>I will sing praises to the name of God, And I will magnify him with thanksgiving. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>This will please Jehovah more than a bull, More than a young bull with horns and hooves. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The meek will see it and rejoice. You who are seeking God, may your hearts revive. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is listening to the poor, And he will not despise his captive people. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Let heaven and earth praise him, The seas and everything that moves in them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For God will save Zion And will rebuild the cities of Judah, And they will dwell there and possess it.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>The descendants of his servants will inherit it, And those who love his name will reside in it. </p><p>To the director. Of David, to serve as a reminder.* <strong>70 </strong>O God, save me; O Jehovah, hurry to help me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May those seeking to take my life* Be put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamity Retreat in humiliation.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May those who are saying: “Aha! Aha!” Be driven back in shame.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But let those who are seeking you Exult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May God be magnified!”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But I am helpless and poor; O God, act quickly in my behalf. You are my helper and my rescuer; O Jehovah, do not delay. </p><p><strong>71 </strong>In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In your righteousness save me and rescue me. Incline your ear* to me and save me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Become for me a rock fortress Where I can always enter. Give the command to save me, For you are my crag and my stronghold.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked, From the grasp of the unjust oppressor.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I have trusted in you* since my youth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have depended on you from birth; It was you who took me from my mother’s womb. I praise you constantly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I have become like a miracle to many, But you are my strong refuge.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>My mouth is filled with your praise; All day long I tell about your splendor.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not cast me off in my old age; Do not abandon me when my strength fails. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>My enemies speak against me, And those seeking to take my life* conspire together, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Saying: “God has abandoned him. Chase after him and seize him, for there is no one to save him.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>O God, do not remain far away from me. O my God, hurry to help me. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>May those who are resisting me* Be put to shame and perish. May those seeking my calamity Be covered with disgrace and humiliation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will continue to wait; I will add to your praise. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My mouth will recount your righteousness, All day long your acts of salvation, Though they are too many for me to grasp.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I will come and tell about your mighty acts, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I will mention your righteousness, yours alone. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heights; You have done great things; O God, who is like you? <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Though you have made me experience much distress and calamity, Revive me again; Bring me up from the depths* of the earth. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May you increase my greatness And surround and comfort me. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Then I will praise you on a stringed instrument Because of your faithfulness, O my God. I will sing your praises* with the harp, O Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>My lips will shout joyfully as I sing praises to you, For you have saved my life.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My tongue will speak about* your righteousness all day long, For those seeking my destruction will be ashamed and disgraced. </p><p>Regarding Solomon. <strong>72 </strong>O God, give your judgments to the king, And endow the son of the king with your righteousness.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness, And of your lowly ones with justice.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May the mountains bring peace to the people, And may the hills bring righteousness.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let him defend* the lowly among the people, Let him save the sons of the poor, And let him crush the defrauder.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will fear you as long as there is a sun And as long as the moon remains, For generation after generation.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass, Like showers of rain that water the earth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In his days the righteous will flourish,* And peace will abound until the moon is no more.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The desert dwellers will bow down before him, And his enemies will lick the dust. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute. The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>All the kings will bow down before him, And all the nations will serve him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba. May prayers be said for him continually, And may he be blessed all day long. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May his name endure forever, And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him; May all nations pronounce him happy. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God, Who alone does wonderful things. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse. </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>73 </strong>God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As for me, my feet had almost strayed; My steps had nearly slipped.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For I became envious of the arrogant* When I would see the peace of the wicked.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they have no pain in their death; Their bodies are healthy.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They are not troubled like other humans, Nor do they suffer like other men.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace; Violence clothes them as a garment.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Their prosperity* makes their eyes bulge; They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They scoff and say evil things. They arrogantly threaten oppression.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They speak as if they were as high as heaven, And their tongues swagger about in the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So his people turn aside to them, And they drink from their abundant water. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They say: “How does God know? Does the Most High really have knowledge?” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy. They keep increasing their wealth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure And washed my hands in innocence. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And I was troubled all day long; Every morning I was chastised. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But if I had said these things, I would have betrayed your people.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When I tried to understand it, It was troubling to me <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God, And I discerned their future. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Surely you place them on slippery ground. You make them fall to their ruin. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>How suddenly they are devastated! How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah, When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss* their image. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But my heart was sour, And deep inside* I felt sharp pain. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I was unreasoning and lacked understanding; I was like a senseless beast before you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>But now I am continually with you; You have taken hold of my right hand. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You guide me with your advice, And afterward you will lead me to glory. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whom do I have in the heavens? And besides you I desire nothing on earth. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>My body and my heart may fail, But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Truly, those keeping far from you will perish. You will put an end to* everyone who immorally* leaves you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge, To declare all your works.</p><p></p><p>Or “have come to my soul.”</p><p>Or “enemies for no reason.”</p><p>Lit., “my soul.”</p><p>Or possibly, “When I wept and fasted.”</p><p>Lit., “a proverb.”</p><p>Or “pit.”</p><p>Or “Come near to my soul and reclaim it.”</p><p>Or “and I am to the point of despair.”</p><p>Or “a poisonous plant.”</p><p>Or “wrath.”</p><p>Or “walled camp.”</p><p>Or “book of life.”</p><p>That is, the land.</p><p>Or “to bring to remembrance.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “You are my confidence.”</p><p>Or “seeking my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “number.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or “watery deeps.”</p><p>Or “make music to you.”</p><p>Or “redeemed my soul.”</p><p>Or “meditate on.”</p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Lit., “sprout.”</p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p><p>Or “boasters.”</p><p>Or “Their paunch is fat.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p><p>Lit., “the generation of your sons.”</p><p>Lit., “despise.”</p><p>Lit., “in my kidneys.”</p><p>Lit., “silence.”</p><p>Or “unfaithfully.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016244.xhtml#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 73:1-28)</strong></a> <span id="citation11"></span>God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As for me, my feet had almost strayed; My steps had nearly slipped.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For I became envious of the arrogant* When I would see the peace of the wicked.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they have no pain in their death; Their bodies are healthy.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They are not troubled like other humans, Nor do they suffer like other men.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace; Violence clothes them as a garment.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Their prosperity* makes their eyes bulge; They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They scoff and say evil things. They arrogantly threaten oppression.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They speak as if they were as high as heaven, And their tongues swagger about in the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So his people turn aside to them, And they drink from their abundant water. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They say: “How does God know? Does the Most High really have knowledge?” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy. They keep increasing their wealth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure And washed my hands in innocence. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And I was troubled all day long; Every morning I was chastised. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But if I had said these things, I would have betrayed your people.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When I tried to understand it, It was troubling to me <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God, And I discerned their future. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Surely you place them on slippery ground. You make them fall to their ruin. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>How suddenly they are devastated! How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah, When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss* their image. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But my heart was sour, And deep inside* I felt sharp pain. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I was unreasoning and lacked understanding; I was like a senseless beast before you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>But now I am continually with you; You have taken hold of my right hand. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You guide me with your advice, And afterward you will lead me to glory. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whom do I have in the heavens? And besides you I desire nothing on earth. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>My body and my heart may fail, But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Truly, those keeping far from you will perish. You will put an end to* everyone who immorally* leaves you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge, To declare all your works.</p><p></p><p>Or “boasters.”</p><p>Or “Their paunch is fat.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p><p>Lit., “the generation of your sons.”</p><p>Lit., “despise.”</p><p>Lit., “in my kidneys.”</p><p>Lit., “silence.”</p><p>Or “unfaithfully.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 92 “Preach the Word”***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 92</p>
<h1><strong>“Preach the Word”</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">2 Timothy 4:2</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. God has commanded us this day;</p>
<p class="p5">He has given us a charge to obey.</p>
<p class="p6">At all times, be ready to impart</p>
<p class="p7">The reason for the hope within your heart.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">So preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p10">Oh, how vital that all hear!</p>
<p class="p11">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p12">As this system’s end draws near.</p>
<p class="p13">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p14">Help the meek to understand.</p>
<p class="p15">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p16">Throughout the land!</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. Seasons of trouble we will face;</p>
<p class="p18">Opposition may bring shame and disgrace.</p>
<p class="p19">Though preaching may out of season seem,</p>
<p class="p20">Our trust is in our God, who is supreme.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p21">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p22">So preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p23">Oh, how vital that all hear!</p>
<p class="p24">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p25">As this system’s end draws near.</p>
<p class="p26">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p27">Help the meek to understand.</p>
<p class="p28">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p29">Throughout the land!</p>
</div>
<p class="p30">3. Seasons of favor we will see,</p>
<p class="p31">And the need for us to teach, there will be.</p>
<p class="p32">The way to salvation we proclaim</p>
<p class="p33">And help to sanctify Jehovah’s name.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p34">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p35">So preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p36">Oh, how vital that all hear!</p>
<p class="p37">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p38">As this system’s end draws near.</p>
<p class="p39">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p40">Help the meek to understand.</p>
<p class="p41">Preach the Word,</p>
<p class="p42">Throughout the land!</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p43">(See also <span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Matt. 10:7;</a><span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14"> 24:14;</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> Acts 10:42;</a><span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16"> 1 Pet. 3:15</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 4:2)</strong></a> Preach the word; be at it urgently in favorable times and difficult times; reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all patience and art of teaching.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:7)</strong></a> As you go, preach, saying: ‘The Kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong></a> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Acts 10:42)</strong></a> Also, he ordered us to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness that this is the one decreed by God to be judge of the living and the dead.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 3:15)</strong></a> But sanctify the Christ as Lord in your hearts, always ready to make a defense before everyone who demands of you a reason for the hope you have, but doing so with a mild temper and deep respect.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w10 12/15 pp. 7-11 Be Zealous for True Worship***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 2. What is the most urgent task for true Christians today?</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>For true Christians today, nothing is more urgent than preaching the good news of the Kingdom and making disciples of people of all the nations. (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Matt. 24:14;</a><span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18"> 28:19, 20</a>) Quoting Jesus, the disciple Mark wrote that this work must be done “first,” that is, before the end comes. (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Mark 13:10</a>) That, of course, is the way it should be. Jesus said: “The harvest is great, but the workers are few.” A harvest cannot wait; it must be brought in before the season is over.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Matt. 9:37</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 3. How have many responded to the urgent need to preach?</p>
<p class="p5"><sup>3 </sup>Because the preaching work is of such importance to us, it deserves our giving it as much of our time, energy, and attention as possible. Commendably, many are doing just that. Some have simplified their personal affairs so as to take up the full-time ministry as pioneers or missionaries or to serve at one of the Bethel homes around the world. Their life is very busy. They may have made many sacrifices, and they have many challenges to meet. Yet, they are richly blessed by Jehovah. We are happy for them. (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21"><em>Luke 18:28-30</em></a><em>.</em>) Others, while unable to join the ranks of full-time proclaimers, devote as much time as possible to this lifesaving work, which includes helping our children to get saved.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Deut. 6:6, 7</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 4. Why might some tend to lose the sense of urgency?</p>
<p class="p6"><sup>4 </sup>As we have seen, a sense of urgency is usually connected with a time limit, a deadline, an end. We are living in the time of the end, and there is plenty of evidence<wbr />—both Scriptural and historical—<wbr />to prove that. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Matt. 24:3,</a><span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24"> 33;</a><span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25"> 2 Tim. 3:1-5</a>) Still, no man knows the exact time when the end will come. When giving the details of “the sign” marking “the conclusion of the system of things,” Jesus specifically said: “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.” (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Matt. 24:36</a>) That being so, some might find it difficult to maintain a sense of urgency year after year, especially if they have been doing so for a long time. (<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Prov. 13:12</a>) Do you at times find yourself feeling that way? What can help us to develop or maintain a sense of urgency for the task that Jehovah God and Jesus Christ want us to do today?</p>
<p class="p7"><strong>Consider Our Exemplar, Jesus</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 5. In what ways did Jesus reflect a sense of urgency in connection with the ministry?</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>Of all those who demonstrated urgency in their service to God, Jesus Christ is surely the foremost example. One reason for his urgency was that he had much to do in a span of only three and a half years. Nevertheless, Jesus accomplished more with regard to true worship than anyone else has ever done. He made known his Father’s name and purpose, preached the good news of the Kingdom, exposed the hypocrisy and false teachings of the religious leaders, and upheld Jehovah’s sovereignty even to the point of death. He spared no effort in traversing the land<wbr />—teaching, helping, and curing the people. (<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Matt. 9:35</a>) No one has ever accomplished so much in such a short time. Jesus worked as hard as anyone possibly could.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">John 18:37</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> 6. What was the focus in Jesus’ life?</p>
<p class="p9"><sup>6 </sup>What moved Jesus to work tirelessly throughout his ministry? From Daniel’s prophecy, Jesus could have known where he was in relation to Jehovah’s timetable. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Dan. 9:27</a>) Thus, as noted, his earthly ministry was to end “at the half of the week,” or after three and a half years. Shortly after his triumphant entry into Jerusalem in the spring of 33 C.E., Jesus said: “The hour has come for the Son of man to be glorified.” (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">John 12:23</a>) Although Jesus knew that his death was imminent, he did not let that become the focus in his life, the prime reason for working hard. Rather, he focused on using every opportunity to do his Father’s will and to show love to his fellow humans. That love moved him to gather and train disciples, sending them out in preaching campaigns. That was so that they would carry on the work he had started and would accomplish even greater works than he did.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32"><em>John 14:12</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="qu">7, 8. How did the disciples react to Jesus’ cleansing of the temple, and why did Jesus act that way?</p>
<p class="p10"><sup>7 </sup>One event in Jesus’ life forcefully demonstrated what zeal he had. It was early in his ministry, in the Passover season of 30 C.E. Jesus and his disciples came to Jerusalem and saw in the temple “those selling cattle and sheep and doves and the money brokers in their seats.” What was Jesus’ response, and what impression did it make on his disciples?<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33"><em>John 2:13-17</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p11"><sup>8 </sup>What Jesus did and said on that occasion fittingly brought to the disciples’ mind the prophetic words of one psalm by David: “Sheer zeal for your house has eaten me up.” (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Ps. 69:9</a>) Why? Because what Jesus did involved a great deal of risk and danger. After all, the temple authorities<wbr />—the priests, the scribes, and others—<wbr />were behind the scandalous profit-making business taking place there. To expose and disrupt their scheme, Jesus was pitting himself against the religious establishment of the day. As the disciples correctly assessed the situation, ‘zeal for God’s house,’ or zeal for true worship, was clearly in evidence. What, though, is zeal? Is it different from urgency?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong>Urgency and Zeal Compared</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> 9. How may zeal be described?</p>
<p class="p13"><sup>9 </sup>One dictionary defines “zeal” as “eagerness and ardent interest in pursuit of something,” and it offers as synonyms such words as passion, fervor, ardor, and enthusiasm. Surely Jesus’ ministry can be characterized by all these expressions. Hence, <em>Today’s English Version </em>renders the verse: “My devotion to your house, O God, burns in me like a fire.” Interestingly, in some Oriental languages, the term for “zeal” is made up of two parts that literally mean “hot heart,” as though the heart were burning. It is no wonder that the disciples recalled David’s words when they saw what Jesus did at the temple. What, though, set Jesus’ heart on fire, as it were, and propelled, or moved, him to act that way?</p>
<p class="qu">10. What is the meaning of “zeal” as used in the Bible?</p>
<p class="p14"><sup>10 </sup>The word “zeal” in David’s psalm is derived from a Hebrew word that is often translated “jealous” or “jealousy” in other parts of the Bible. The <em>New World Translation </em>sometimes renders it “exacting exclusive devotion.” (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35"><em>Exodus 20:5;</em></a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> <em>34:14;</em></a><span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37"> <em>Joshua 24:19</em></a><em>.</em>) One Bible dictionary says of this term: “It is often used in connection with the marriage relation . . . Just as jealousy in husband or wife is the forceful assertion of an exclusive right, so God asserts His claim, and vindicates it, on those who are His sole possession.” Thus, zeal in the Biblical sense is more than fervor or enthusiasm for a certain pursuit, such as many fans show for their favorite sport. David’s zeal was jealousy in the positive sense, that is, an intolerance of rivalry or reproach, a strong urge to protect a good name or to correct an injury.</p>
<p class="qu">11. What was it that moved Jesus to exert himself zealously?</p>
<p class="p15"><sup>11 </sup>Jesus’ disciples were not mistaken in associating David’s words with what they saw Jesus do at the temple. Jesus exerted himself not simply because he had a deadline but because he was zealous<wbr />—or jealous—<wbr />for his Father’s name and for pure worship. When he saw the reproach and blasphemy heaped upon God’s name, he was rightly zealous, or jealous, and acted to correct the situation. When Jesus saw the humble people oppressed and exploited by the religious leaders, his zeal moved him to bring relief to the people as well as to utter forceful denunciations against the oppressive religious leaders.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Matt. 9:36;</a><span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39"> 23:2,</a><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"> 4,</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> 27, 28,</a><span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42"> 33</a>.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>Be Zealous for True Worship</strong></p>
<p class="qu">12, 13. What have Christendom’s religious leaders today done regarding (a) God’s name? (b) God’s Kingdom?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>12 </sup>The religious scene around us today is similar<wbr />—if not worse—<wbr />than it was in Jesus’ day. For example, recall that the first thing Jesus taught his followers to pray for concerned God’s name: “Let your name be sanctified.” (<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Matt. 6:9</a>) Do we see the religious leaders, especially the clergy of Christendom, teaching people to know God by his name and to sanctify, or honor, that name? On the contrary, they have misrepresented God by such false teachings as the Trinity, immortality of the human soul, and hellfire, making God appear mysterious, unfathomable, cruel, even sadistic. They have also brought reproach on God by their scandals and their hypocrisy. (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44"><em>Romans 2:21-24</em></a><em>.</em>) Furthermore, they have done everything possible to hide God’s personal name, even removing it from their translations of the Bible. They thus hinder people from drawing close to God and cultivating a personal relationship with him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Jas. 4:7, 8</a>.</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>13 </sup>Jesus also taught his followers to pray for God’s Kingdom: “Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.” (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Matt. 6:10</a>) Though Christendom’s religious leaders often repeat that prayer, they have urged people to support political and other human institutions. Moreover, they belittle those who endeavor to preach and bear witness to this Kingdom. As a result, among many who claim to be Christians, God’s Kingdom is no longer a topic for discussion, let alone a matter of faith.</p>
<p class="qu">14. How have the clergy of Christendom watered down God’s Word?</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>14 </sup>In prayer to God, Jesus clearly stated: “Your word is truth.” (<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">John 17:17</a>) And before leaving the earthly scene, Jesus indicated that he would appoint “the faithful and discreet slave” to provide spiritual food for his people. (<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Matt. 24:45</a>) Though quick to claim stewardship of God’s Word, have the clergy of Christendom proved to be faithful to the Master’s trust? No. They have been inclined to label what the Bible says as fable or myth. Rather than feeding their flock with spiritual food, thus bringing them comfort and enlightenment, the clergy have tickled the believers’ ears with human philosophy. In addition, they have watered down God’s moral standards to cater to the so-called new morality.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">2 Tim. 4:3, 4</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">15. How do you feel about all that the clergy have done in the name of God?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>15 </sup>Because of all that has been done<wbr />—supposedly in the name of the God of the Bible—<wbr />many sincere people have become disillusioned or have completely lost their faith in God and in the Bible. They have fallen prey to Satan and his wicked system of things. When you see and hear about such things taking place day after day, how do you feel? As a servant of Jehovah, when you see the reproach and blasphemy heaped upon God’s name, do you not feel impelled to do what you can to right the wrong? When you see sincere and honesthearted people being deceived and exploited, do you not feel moved to bring comfort to the oppressed souls? When Jesus saw people of his day being “skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd,” he did not just feel pity. He “started to teach them many things.” (<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">Matt. 9:36;</a><span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51"> Mark 6:34</a>) We have every reason to be zealous for true worship, as Jesus was.</p>
<p class="qu">16, 17. (a) What should impel us to exert ourselves in the ministry? (b) What will we consider in the following article?</p>
<p class="p21"><sup>16 </sup>When we view our ministry that way, the apostle Paul’s words found at <span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">1 Timothy 2:3, 4</a> take on special meaning. (<em>Read.</em>) We work hard in the ministry not only because we know we are living in the last days but also because we realize that it is God’s will. He wants people to come to a knowledge of the truth so that they too can learn to worship and serve him and be blessed. We are impelled to exert ourselves in the ministry, not primarily because of a time limit, but because we want to honor God’s name and help people to come to know his will. We are zealous for true worship.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">1 Tim. 4:16</a>.</p>
<p class="p22"><sup>17 </sup>As Jehovah’s people, we have been blessed with the knowledge of the truth about God’s purpose for mankind and the earth. We have the means to help people find happiness and a sure hope for the future. We can point them to the way to stay safe when destruction comes upon Satan’s system of things. (<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">2 Thess. 1:7-9</a>) Rather than feel frustrated or discouraged because Jehovah’s day seems to be delayed, we should be glad that there is still time for us to be zealous for true worship. (<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Mic. 7:7;</a><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"> Hab. 2:3</a>) How can we develop such zeal? We will consider this in the following article.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 28:19, 20)</strong> Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”*</p><p></p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Mark 13:10)</strong> Also, in all the nations, the good news has to be preached first.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 9:37)</strong> Then he said to his disciples: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Luke 18:28-30)</strong> But Peter said: “Look! We have left what was ours and followed you.” <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He said to them: “Truly I say to you, there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the Kingdom of God <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>who will not get many times more in this period of time, and in the coming system of things,* everlasting life.”</p><p></p><p>Or “the coming age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 6:6, 7)</strong> These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and you must inculcate them in* your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.</p><p></p><p>Or “repeat them to; impress them upon.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:33)</strong> Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:1-5)</strong> But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>having an appearance of godliness but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:36)</strong> “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 13:12)</strong> Expectation* postponed makes the heart sick, But a desire realized is a tree of life.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hope.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 9:35)</strong> And Jesus set out on a tour of all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the Kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 18:37)</strong> So Pilate said to him: “Well, then, are you a king?” Jesus answered: “You yourself are saying that I am a king. For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 9:27)</strong> “And he will keep the covenant in force for the many for one week; and at the half of the week, he will cause sacrifice and gift offering to cease. “And on the wing of disgusting things there will be the one causing desolation; and until an extermination, what was decided on will be poured out also on the one lying desolate.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 12:23)</strong> But Jesus answered them: “The hour has come for the Son of man to be glorified.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(John 14:12)</strong> Most truly I say to you, whoever exercises faith in me will also do the works that I do; and he will do works greater than these, because I am going my way to the Father.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(John 2:13-17)</strong> Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He found in the temple those selling cattle and sheep and doves, and the money brokers in their seats. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>So after making a whip of ropes, he drove all those with the sheep and cattle out of the temple, and he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>And he said to those selling the doves: “Take these things away from here! Stop making the house of my Father a house of commerce!”* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>His disciples recalled that it is written: “The zeal for your house will consume me.”</p><p></p><p>Or “a marketplace; a business.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 69:9)</strong> Zeal for your house has consumed me, And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 20:5)</strong> You must not bow down to them nor be enticed to serve them, for I, Jehovah your God, am a God who requires exclusive devotion, bringing punishment for the error of fathers upon sons, upon the third generation and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 34:14)</strong> You must not bow down to another god, for Jehovah is known for* requiring exclusive devotion.* Yes, he is a God who requires exclusive devotion.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Jehovah, his name is.”</p><p>Or “not tolerating rivals.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 24:19)</strong> Then Joshua said to the people: “You are not able to serve Jehovah, for he is a holy God; he is a God who requires exclusive devotion. He will not pardon your transgressions* and your sins.</p><p></p><p>Or “rebellion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 9:36)</strong> On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 23:2)</strong> “The scribes and the Pharisees have seated themselves in the seat of Moses.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 23:4)</strong> They bind up heavy loads and put them on the shoulders of men, but they themselves are not willing to budge them with their finger.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 23:27, 28)</strong> “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because you resemble whitewashed graves, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful but inside are full of dead men’s bones and of every sort of uncleanness. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>In the same way, on the outside you appear righteous to men, but inside you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 23:33)</strong> “Serpents, offspring of vipers, how will you flee from the judgment of Ge·henʹna?*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:9)</strong> “You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.*</p><p></p><p>Or “be held sacred; be treated as holy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 2:21-24)</strong> do you, however, the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself? You, the one preaching, “Do not steal,” do you steal? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>You, the one saying, “Do not commit adultery,” do you commit adultery? You, the one abhorring idols, do you rob temples? <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>You who take pride in law, do you dishonor God by your transgressing of the Law? <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>For “the name of God is being blasphemed among the nations because of you,” just as it is written.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:7, 8)</strong> Therefore, subject yourselves to God; but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from you. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:10)</strong> Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(John 17:17)</strong> Sanctify them* by means of the truth; your word is truth.</p><p></p><p>Or “Set them apart; Make them holy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 4:3, 4)</strong> For there will be a period of time when they will not put up with the wholesome* teaching, but according to their own desires, they will surround themselves with teachers to have their ears tickled.* <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They will turn away from listening to the truth and give attention to false stories.</p><p></p><p>Or “healthful; beneficial.”</p><p>Or “to tell them what they want to hear.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 9:36)</strong> On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Mark 6:34)</strong> Well, on getting out, he saw a large crowd, and he was moved with pity for them, because they were as sheep without a shepherd. And he started to teach them many things.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 2:3, 4)</strong> This is fine and acceptable in the sight of our Savior, God, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 4:16)</strong> Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(2 Thess. 1:7-9)</strong> But you who suffer tribulation will be given relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Mic. 7:7)</strong> But as for me, I will keep on the lookout for Jehovah. I will show a waiting attitude* for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.</p><p></p><p>Or “I will wait patiently.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Hab. 2:3)</strong> For the vision is yet for its appointed time, And it is rushing toward its end,* and it will not lie. Even if it should delay,* keep in expectation of it!* For it will without fail come true. It will not be late!</p><p></p><p>Or “fulfillment.”</p><p>Or “if it seems to delay.”</p><p>Or “wait eagerly for it!”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w14 1/15 pp. 23-24 Serving Jehovah Before the Days of Distress Come***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>4. </strong>What question can Christians with long experience ask themselves, and why?</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>If you have acquired decades of experience as an adult, you have a key question to ask yourself, ‘What will I do with my life now while I still have some energy and strength?’ As an experienced Christian, you have opportunities that are not open to others. You can pass on to younger ones what you have learned from Jehovah. You can strengthen others by relating experiences you have enjoyed while serving God. King David prayed for opportunities to do so. He wrote: “O God, you have taught me from my youth . . . Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power and about your mightiness to all those who are to come.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Ps. 71:17, 18</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>5. </strong>How can older Christians pass on to others what they have learned?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>How could you make known the wisdom you have acquired over the years? Could you invite younger servants of God to your home for some upbuilding association? Could you ask them to accompany you in the Christian ministry and show them the joy you experience in serving Jehovah? Elihu of ancient times said: “Let age speak, and let a multitude of years declare wisdom.” (<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Job 32:7</a>) The apostle Paul urged experienced Christian women to encourage others by word and example. He wrote: “Let the older women be . . . teachers of what is good.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">Titus 2:3</a>.</p>
<h2><strong>CONSIDER YOUR POTENTIAL FOR HELPING OTHERS</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>Why should Christians with decades of experience not underestimate their potential?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>If you are an experienced Christian, you have great potential. Consider what you understand now that you did not know 30 or 40 years ago. You can skillfully apply Bible principles in life. No doubt you have the ability to reach the hearts of others with Bible truth. If you are an elder, you know how to help brothers who take a false step. (<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Gal. 6:1</a>) Perhaps you have learned how to oversee congregation activities, assembly departments, or Kingdom Hall construction. You may know how to encourage doctors to use health-care strategies that avoid the use of blood. Even if you have only recently learned the truth, you have valuable experience in life. For example, if you have raised children, you will have gained much practical wisdom. Older Christians are a potentially powerful source of encouragement for Jehovah’s people by teaching, leading, and strengthening the brothers and sisters.<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61"><strong>Job 12:12</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>7. </strong>What useful training can older Christians provide for younger ones?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>How could you use your potential more fully? Perhaps you could show younger ones how to start and conduct Bible studies. If you are a sister, could you suggest to young mothers how they might keep up with spiritual activities while caring for small children? If you are a brother, could you teach young brothers to give talks with enthusiasm and to be more effective preachers of the good news? Could you show them how you visit elderly brothers and sisters to encourage them spiritually? Even if you do not have the physical power that you used to have, you have splendid opportunities to train younger ones. God’s Word says: “The glory of young men is their strength, and the splendor of old men is their gray hair.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Prov. 20:29</a>.</p>
<h2><strong>SERVING WHERE THE NEED IS GREATER</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>8. </strong>What did the apostle Paul do later in life?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The apostle Paul used his full potential to serve God later in life. By the time he was released from prison in Rome about 61 C.E., he had endured many years of rigorous missionary service, and he could have settled down to preach in Rome. (<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">2 Cor. 11:23-27</a>) The brothers in that large city would no doubt have valued his continued support. But Paul saw that the need was even greater overseas. With Timothy and Titus, he resumed his missionary activity, traveling to Ephesus, then on to Crete, and probably to Macedonia. (<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">1 Tim. 1:3;</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> Titus 1:5</a>) We do not know if he visited Spain, but he intended to do so.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Rom. 15:24,</a><span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67"> 28</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>9. </strong>When may Peter have moved to serve where the need was greater? (See opening image.)</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The apostle Peter may have been over 50 when he moved to where the need was greater. Why may that be true? If he was about the same age as Jesus or perhaps somewhat older, he would have been about 50 years old when he met with the other apostles in Jerusalem in the year 49 C.E. (<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Acts 15:7</a>) Some time after that meeting, Peter went to live in Babylon, doubtless to preach to the large population of Jews in that area. (<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Gal. 2:9</a>) He was residing there when he wrote his first inspired letter, about 62 C.E. (<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">1 Pet. 5:13</a>) Settling in a foreign land can be challenging, but Peter did not allow the fact that he was advancing in age to rob him of the joy of serving Jehovah fully.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>10, 11. </strong>Relate an experience about someone who later in life moved to serve where the need is greater.</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Today, many Christians in their 50’s and older find that their circumstances have changed and that they are able to serve Jehovah in new ways. Some have moved to where the need is greater. For example, Robert writes: “My wife and I were in our mid-50’s when we realized what opportunities lay before us. Our only son had left home, we no longer had aging parents needing care, and we had received a small inheritance. I calculated that the sale of our house would suffice to pay off the mortgage and provide for us until I received income from my retirement pension. We heard that in Bolivia the number of people accepting Bible studies is high but the cost of living is low. So we decided to move. Adapting to our new home was not easy. Everything was so different from what we were accustomed to in North America. But our efforts were well rewarded.”</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 71:17, 18)</strong> O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Job 32:7)</strong> I thought, ‘Let age* speak, And let a multitude of years declare wisdom.’</p><p></p><p>Lit., “days.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Titus 2:3)</strong> Likewise, let the older women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Gal. 6:1)</strong> Brothers, even if a man takes a false step before he is aware of it, you who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness. But keep an eye on yourself, for fear you too may be tempted.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Job 12:12)</strong> Is not wisdom found among the aged, And does not understanding come with a long life?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 20:29)</strong> The glory of young men is their strength, And the splendor of old men is their gray hair.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 11:23-27)</strong> Are they ministers of Christ? I reply like a madman, I am more outstandingly one: I have done more work, been imprisoned more often, suffered countless beatings, and experienced many near-deaths. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Five times I received 40 strokes less one from the Jews, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I experienced shipwreck, a night and a day I have spent in the open sea; <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>in journeys often, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from robbers, in dangers from my own people, in dangers from the nations, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers, <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>in labor and toil, in sleepless nights often, in hunger and thirst, frequently without food, in cold and lacking clothing.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “and in nakedness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 1:3)</strong> Just as I encouraged you to stay in Ephʹe·sus when I was about to go to Mac·e·doʹni·a, so I do now, in order for you to command certain ones not to teach different doctrine,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Titus 1:5)</strong> I left you in Crete so that you would correct the things that were defective* and make appointments of elders in city after city, as I instructed you:</p><p></p><p>Or “deficient.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 15:24)</strong> Therefore, when I journey to Spain, I hope that I will see you and be accompanied partway there by you after I have first enjoyed your company for a time.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 15:28)</strong> So after I have finished with this and have delivered this contribution* securely to them, I will depart by way of you for Spain.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “fruit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Acts 15:7)</strong> After much intense discussion* had taken place, Peter rose and said to them: “Men, brothers, you well know that from early days God made the choice among you that through my mouth people of the nations should hear the word of the good news and believe.</p><p></p><p>Or “much disputing.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Gal. 2:9)</strong> and when they recognized the undeserved kindness that was given me, James and Ceʹphas* and John, the ones who seemed to be pillars, gave Barʹna·bas and me the right hand of fellowship,* so that we should go to the nations but they to those who are circumcised.</p><p></p><p>Also called Peter.</p><p>Or “partnership.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:13)</strong> She who is in Babylon, a chosen one like you, sends you her greetings, and so does Mark, my son.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w15 10/1 p. 16 par. 3 Bible Questions Answered***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>Who can eliminate poverty?</strong></h2>
<p class="p6">God has appointed his Son, Jesus, to rule over all mankind. (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Psalm 2:4-8</a>) Jesus will rescue the poor and bring an end to oppression and violence.<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"><strong>Psalm 72:8,</strong></a><span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73"> <strong>12-14</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 2:4-8)</strong> The One enthroned in the heavens will laugh; Jehovah will scoff at them.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>At that time he will speak to them in his anger And terrify them in his burning anger,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Saying: “I myself have installed my king On Zion, my holy mountain.”  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let me proclaim the decree of Jehovah; He said to me: “You are my son; Today I have become your father.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Ask of me, and I will give nations as your inheritance And the ends of the earth as your possession.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:8)</strong> He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:12-14)</strong> For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w10 8/15 p. 32 Who Can Deliver Those Crying for Help?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p25"><strong>A New World of Plenty Awaits Us</strong></p>
<p class="qu">19, 20. (a) As indicated in <span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Psalm 72</a>, what problem will be solved by Kingdom rule? (b) To whom should primary credit go for Christ’s rule, and how do you feel about what it will accomplish?</p>
<p class="p26"><sup>19 </sup>Try again to visualize the future of upright humans in God’s new world under the rule of the Greater Solomon. “There will come to be plenty of grain on the earth,” we are promised. “On the top of the mountains there will be an overflow.” (<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Ps. 72:16</a>) Since grain is not ordinarily produced on mountain tops, these words emphasize how productive the earth will become. Its produce “will be as in Lebanon,” a region that produced abundantly at the time of Solomon’s reign. Just think! No more food shortages, no one undernourished, nobody starving! All will then enjoy “a banquet of well-oiled dishes.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Isa. 25:6-8;</a><span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77"> 35:1, 2</a>.</p>
<p class="p27"><sup>20 </sup>To whom will credit go for all these blessings? Primarily to the Eternal King and Universal Ruler, Jehovah God. In effect, all of us will then joyfully add our voices to the concluding portion of this beautiful and heartwarming song: “Let his name [that of the King Jesus Christ] prove to be to time indefinite; before the sun let his name have increase, and by means of him let them bless themselves; let all nations pronounce him happy. Blessed be Jehovah God, Israel’s God, who alone is doing wonderful works. And blessed be his glorious name to time indefinite, and let his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Ps. 72:17-19</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:0-20)</strong></a> Regarding Solomon. <strong>72 </strong>O God, give your judgments to the king, And endow the son of the king with your righteousness.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness, And of your lowly ones with justice.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May the mountains bring peace to the people, And may the hills bring righteousness.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let him defend* the lowly among the people, Let him save the sons of the poor, And let him crush the defrauder.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will fear you as long as there is a sun And as long as the moon remains, For generation after generation.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass, Like showers of rain that water the earth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In his days the righteous will flourish,* And peace will abound until the moon is no more.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The desert dwellers will bow down before him, And his enemies will lick the dust. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute. The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>All the kings will bow down before him, And all the nations will serve him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba. May prayers be said for him continually, And may he be blessed all day long. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May his name endure forever, And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him; May all nations pronounce him happy. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God, Who alone does wonderful things. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Lit., “sprout.”</p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:16)</strong> There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 25:6-8)</strong> In this mountain Jehovah of armies will make for all the peoples A banquet of rich dishes, A banquet of fine wine,* Of rich dishes filled with marrow, Of fine, filtered wine.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In this mountain he will do away with* the shroud that is enveloping all the peoples And the covering* that is woven over all the nations.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will swallow up* death forever, And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces. The reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth, For Jehovah himself has spoken it.</p><p></p><p>Or “of wine kept on the dregs.”</p><p>Lit., “swallow up.”</p><p>Or “veil.”</p><p>Or “do away with.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 35:1, 2)</strong> The wilderness and the parched land will exult, And the desert plain will be joyful and blossom as the saffron.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Without fail it will blossom; It will rejoice and shout for joy. The glory of Lebʹa·non will be given to it, The splendor of Carʹmel and of Sharʹon. They will see the glory of Jehovah, the splendor of our God.</p><p></p><p>Or “crocus.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:17-19)</strong> May his name endure forever, And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him; May all nations pronounce him happy. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God, Who alone does wonderful things. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w11 8/15 p. 11 They Waited for the Messiah***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">17. John made what application of <span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Psalm 69:4</a>?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>17 </sup><em>The Messiah would be hated without cause. </em>(<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">Ps. 69:4</a>) The apostle John quotes Jesus as saying: “If I had not done among [the people] the works that no one else did, they would have no sin; but now they have both seen and hated me as well as my Father. But it is that the word written in their Law may be fulfilled, ‘They hated me without cause.’” (<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">John 15:24, 25</a>) Often the “Law” means the whole body of Scripture. (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">John 10:34;</a><span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83"> 12:34</a>) The Gospel accounts prove that Jesus was hated, especially by the Jewish religious leaders. Moreover, Christ said: “The world has no reason to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness concerning it that its works are wicked.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">John 7:7</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Ps. 69:4)</strong></a> Those hating me without cause Are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me, My treacherous enemies,* have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.</p><p></p><p>Or “enemies for no reason.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 69:4)</strong> Those hating me without cause Are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me, My treacherous enemies,* have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.</p><p></p><p>Or “enemies for no reason.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(John 15:24, 25)</strong> If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would have no sin; but now they have both seen me and hated me as well as my Father. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>But this happened in order to fulfill the word written in their Law: ‘They hated me without cause.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(John 10:34)</strong> Jesus answered them: “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said: “You are gods”’?*</p><p></p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(John 12:34)</strong> Then the crowd answered him: “We heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever. How can you say that the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(John 7:7)</strong> The world has no reason to hate you, but it hates me, because I bear witness about it that its works are wicked.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w11 8/15 p. 15 They Found the Messiah!***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p21"><sup>15 </sup><em>The Messiah would be given vinegar and gall. </em>“For food they gave me a poisonous plant,” said the psalmist, “and for my thirst they tried to make me drink vinegar.” (<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Ps. 69:21</a>) Matthew tells us: “They gave [Jesus] wine mixed with gall to drink; but, after tasting it, he refused to drink.” Later, “one of them ran and took a sponge and soaked it with sour wine and put it on a reed and went giving him a drink.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Matt. 27:34,</a><span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87"> 48</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 69:21)</strong> But for food they gave me poison,* And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.</p><p></p><p>Or “a poisonous plant.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 27:34)</strong> they gave him wine mixed with gall* to drink; but after tasting it, he refused to drink it.</p><p></p><p>A bitter liquid.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 27:48)</strong> And immediately one of them ran and took a sponge and soaked it in sour wine and put it on a reed and gave it to him to drink.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w13 2/15 pp. 25-26 Let Nothing Hinder You From Taking Hold of Glory***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>3-5. </strong>To what glory may Jehovah lead us?</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The psalmist expressed confidence that Jehovah would take hold of him by the right hand and lead him to genuine glory. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"><strong><em>Psalm 73:23, 24</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>How does Jehovah do this? Jehovah leads his humble servants to glory by honoring them in numerous ways. He blesses them with an understanding of his will. (<span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89">1 Cor. 2:7</a>) He bestows upon those who listen to his word and obey him the honor of a close personal relationship with him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90">Jas. 4:8</a>.</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah also entrusts his servants with the glorious treasure of the Christian ministry. (<span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91">2 Cor. 4:1,</a><span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92"> 7</a>) And this ministry leads to glory. To those who use their privilege of service to his praise and to the benefit of others, Jehovah promises: “Those honoring me I shall honor.” (<span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93">1 Sam. 2:30</a>) Such ones are honored with a good name with Jehovah, and they are likely to be well spoken of by other servants of God.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94">Prov. 11:16;</a><span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95"> 22:1</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 73:23, 24)</strong> But now I am continually with you; You have taken hold of my right hand. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You guide me with your advice, And afterward you will lead me to glory.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 2:7)</strong> But we speak God’s wisdom in a sacred secret, the hidden wisdom, which God foreordained before the systems of things for our glory.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:8)</strong> Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 4:1)</strong> Therefore, since we have this ministry through the mercy that was shown us, we do not give up.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 4:7)</strong> However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels,* so that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not from us.</p><p></p><p>Or “in jars of clay.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(1 Sam. 2:30)</strong> “‘That is why the word of Jehovah the God of Israel is: “I did indeed say that your house and the house of your forefather would always walk before me.” But now Jehovah declares: “It is unthinkable, on my part, because those honoring me I will honor, but those despising me will be treated with contempt.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 11:16)</strong> A gracious* woman acquires glory, But ruthless men seize riches.</p><p></p><p>Or “charming.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 22:1)</strong> A good name* is to be chosen rather than great wealth; To be respected* is better than silver and gold.</p><p></p><p>Or “A good reputation.” Lit., “A name.”</p><p>Lit., “Favor.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***fg lesson 5***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p7">Adam and Eve disobeyed God, so Jehovah put them out of the garden. Paradise was lost, and no man has succeeded in restoring it. The Bible says: “The earth has been handed over to the wicked.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96">Job 9:24</a>.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97"><em>Genesis 3:23, 24</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p8">Has Jehovah abandoned his original purpose for mankind? No! He is almighty. He cannot fail. (<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">Isaiah 45:18</a>) He will restore the human race to the way he meant it to be.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99"><em>Psalm 37:11,</em></a><span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100"> <em>34</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Job 9:24)</strong> The earth has been handed over to the wicked; He covers the eyes* of its judges. If it is not he, then, who is it?</p><p></p><p>Lit., “faces.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 3:23, 24)</strong> With that Jehovah God expelled him from the garden of Eʹden to cultivate the ground from which he had been taken. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>So he drove the man out, and he posted at the east of the garden of Eʹden the cherubs and the flaming blade of a sword that was turning continuously to guard the way to the tree of life.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 45:18)</strong> For this is what Jehovah says, The Creator of the heavens, the true God, The One who formed the earth, its Maker who firmly established it, Who did not create it simply for nothing,* but formed it to be inhabited: “I am Jehovah, and there is no one else.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “to be empty.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 37:11)</strong> But the meek will possess the earth, And they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 37:34)</strong> Hope in Jehovah and follow his way, And he will exalt you to take possession of the earth. When the wicked are done away with, you will see it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***snnw song 140 The Life of a Pioneer***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 140</p>
<h1><strong>The Life of a Pioneer</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">           Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">           Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Ecclesiastes 11:6</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             At the start of the day, with the sun yet to rise,</p>
<p class="p8">We are making our way</p>
<p class="p9">with the sleep in our eyes,</p>
<p class="p10">and we pray.</p>
<p class="p11">We are there with a smile for the people we meet.</p>
<p class="p12">Some may stop for a while,</p>
<p class="p13">some pass by on the street, but we stay.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p14">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p15">It’s the life that we choose;</p>
<p class="p16">For Jehovah we live.</p>
<p class="p17">And whatever he asks, we will do.</p>
<p class="p18">In the work we endure,</p>
<p class="p19">Whether sunshine or rain.</p>
<p class="p20">It’s a way we can say ev’ry day:</p>
<p class="p21">“I love you.”</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p22">             At the end of the day, with the sun sinking low,</p>
<p class="p23">Feeling happy and tired,</p>
<p class="p24">in our heart there’s a glow,</p>
<p class="p25">and we pray.</p>
<p class="p26">It’s a life that we love, always giving our best.</p>
<p class="p27">And Jehovah we thank,</p>
<p class="p28">for by him we are blessed ev’ry day.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p29">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p30">It’s the life that we choose;</p>
<p class="p31">For Jehovah we live.</p>
<p class="p32">And whatever he asks, we will do.</p>
<p class="p33">In the work we endure,</p>
<p class="p34">Whether sunshine or rain.</p>
<p class="p35">It’s a way we can say ev’ry day:</p>
<p class="p36">“I love you.”</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p37">(See also <span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102">Josh. 24:15;</a><span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103"> Ps. 92:2;</a><span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104"> Rom. 14:8</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <strong>(Eccl. 11:6)</strong></a> Sow your seed in the morning and do not let your hand rest until the evening; for you do not know which will have success, whether this one or that one, or whether they will both do well.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <strong>(Josh. 24:15)</strong></a> Now if it seems bad to you to serve Jehovah, choose for yourselves today whom you will serve, whether the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the River* or the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling. But as for me and my household, we will serve Jehovah.”</p><p></p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <strong>(Ps. 92:2)</strong></a> To declare your loyal love in the morning And your faithfulness during the nights,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <strong>(Rom. 14:8)</strong></a> For if we live, we live to Jehovah,* and if we die, we die to Jehovah.* So both if we live and if we die, we belong to Jehovah.*</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***ia pp. 166-171 He Protected, He Provided, He Persevered***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>17, 18. </strong>(a) What did Jesus learn from his adoptive father? (b) Why did Joseph have to work ever harder at his trade?</p>
<p class="p21"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Imagine Jesus as a small boy watching his adoptive father at work. His eyes wide and intent on Joseph’s every movement, he no doubt admired the strength in those broad shoulders and sinewy arms, the skill of the hands, the intelligence in the eyes. Perhaps Joseph began showing his young son how to perform such simple tasks as using dried fish skin to smooth out rough spots on wood. He likely taught Jesus the differences between the varieties of wood that he used<wbr />—the sycamore fig, oak, or olive, for example.</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Jesus learned, too, that those strong hands that felled trees, hewed beams, and pounded joints together were also gentle hands that caressed and comforted him, his mother, and his siblings. Yes, Joseph and Mary had a growing family that eventually included at least six children in addition to Jesus. (<span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105">Matt. 13:55, 56</a>) Joseph had to work ever harder to care for and feed them all.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p70">Joseph understood that caring for his family’s spiritual needs was paramount</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"><strong>19. </strong>How did Joseph care for his family’s spiritual needs?</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Joseph, however, understood that caring for his family’s spiritual needs was paramount. So he spent time teaching his children about Jehovah God and His laws. He and Mary regularly took them to the local synagogue, where the Law was read aloud and explained. Perhaps Jesus was full of questions afterward, and Joseph tried hard to satisfy the boy’s spiritual hunger. Joseph also took his family to religious festivals in Jerusalem. For the annual Passover, Joseph may have needed two weeks to make the 75-mile journey (120 km), observe the occasion, and return home.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20. </strong>How can Christian family heads follow the pattern set by Joseph?</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Christian family heads today follow a similar pattern. They give of themselves for their children, putting spiritual training above every other concern, including material comforts. They go to great lengths to conduct family worship at home and to take their children to Christian meetings both large and small. Like Joseph, they know that there is no better investment they can make for the sake of their children.</p>
<h2><strong>“In Mental Distress”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>21. </strong>What was Passover time like for Joseph’s family, and when did Joseph and Mary notice that Jesus was missing?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>When Jesus was 12 years old, Joseph took the family to Jerusalem as usual. It was Passover, a festive time, and large families traveled together in long caravans through the lush spring countryside. As they approached the starker landscapes near lofty Jerusalem, many would sing the familiar psalms of ascent. (<span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106">Ps. 120-134</a>) The city likely teemed with hundreds of thousands of people. Afterward, the families and their caravans began to head homeward. Joseph and Mary, perhaps with much to do, assumed that Jesus was traveling with others, maybe family members. Only after Jerusalem lay a full day behind them did they realize a terrifying truth<wbr />—Jesus was missing!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107">Luke 2:41-44</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>22, 23. </strong>What did Joseph and Mary do about their missing boy, and what did Mary say when they finally found him?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Frantically, they retraced their steps all the way to Jerusalem. Imagine how empty and strange the city seemed to them now as they paced the streets, calling out their son’s name. Where could the boy be? By the third day of searching, did Joseph begin to wonder if he had failed terribly in this sacred trust from Jehovah? Finally, they went to the temple. There they searched until they came upon a chamber where many learned men, versed in the Law, were gathered<wbr />—with young Jesus sitting among them! Imagine the relief Joseph and Mary felt!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108">Luke 2:45, 46</a>.</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Jesus was listening to the learned men and eagerly asking questions. The men were amazed at the child’s understanding and his answers. Mary and Joseph, though, were astounded. In the Bible record, Joseph is silent. But Mary’s words speak eloquently for both of them: “Child, why did you treat us this way? Here your father and I in mental distress have been looking for you.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109">Luke 2:47, 48</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>24. </strong>How does the Bible paint a realistic picture of parenthood?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Thus in a few deft strokes, God’s Word paints a realistic picture of parenthood. It can be stressful<wbr />—even when the child is perfect! Parenting in today’s dangerous world can bring untold “mental distress,” but fathers and mothers can take comfort in knowing that the Bible acknowledges the challenge they face.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>25, 26. </strong>How did Jesus answer his parents, and how might Joseph have felt about his son’s words?</p>
<p class="p30"><strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Jesus had stayed in the one place in the world where he felt the closest to his heavenly Father, Jehovah, eagerly soaking up anything he could learn. He answered his parents in simple sincerity: “Why did you have to go looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in the house of my Father?”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110">Luke 2:49</a>.</p>
<p class="p31"><strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Joseph surely thought about those words many times. Perhaps he came to beam with pride over them. After all, he had worked diligently to teach his adopted son to feel that way about Jehovah God. By that time in his life as a boy, Jesus already had warm feelings about the word “father”<wbr />—feelings shaped largely by his years with Joseph.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>27. </strong>As a father, how are you privileged, and why should you remember Joseph’s example?</p>
<p class="p32"><strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>If you are a father, do you realize how privileged you are to help your children to form a concept of what a loving, protective father is? Likewise, if you have stepchildren or adopted children, remember Joseph’s example and treat each child as unique and precious. Help those children to draw closer to their heavenly Father, Jehovah God.<wbr /><em>—<strong>Read </strong></em><strong></strong><span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111"><strong><em>Ephesians 6:4</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<h2><strong>Joseph Persevered Faithfully</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>28, 29. </strong>(a) What do the words recorded at <span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112">Luke 2:51, 52</a> reveal about Joseph? (b) Joseph played what role in helping his son progress in wisdom?</p>
<p class="p34"><strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The Bible discloses only a few more traces of Joseph’s life, but they are worth considering carefully. We read that Jesus “continued subject to them”<wbr />—his parents. We also find that “Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.” <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113"><strong><em>Luke 2:51,</em></strong> <strong><em>52</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>)</strong> What do those words reveal about Joseph? Several things. We learn that Joseph continued taking the lead in his household, for his perfect son respected his father’s authority and remained in subjection to it.</p>
<p class="p35"><strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>We further learn that Jesus continued to grow in wisdom. Joseph surely had much to do with his son’s progress in that regard. In those days, there was a time-honored proverb among the Jews. It can still be found and read today. The saying asserts that only men of leisure can become truly wise, whereas tradesmen, such as carpenters, farmers, and blacksmiths, “cannot declare justice and judgment; and they shall not be found where parables are spoken.” Later, Jesus exposed the emptiness of that proverb. As a boy, how often he had heard his adoptive father, humble carpenter though he was, teach effectively about Jehovah’s “justice and judgment”! No doubt, there were countless occasions.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>30. </strong>How did Joseph set an example for family heads today?</p>
<p class="p36"><strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>We can also see evidence of Joseph’s influence in Jesus’ physical growth. A well-cared-for boy, Jesus grew into a strong, healthy man. Further, Joseph trained his son to be skilled at his physical work. Jesus was known not only as the carpenter’s son but also as “the carpenter.” (<span id="citationsource114"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation114">Mark 6:3</a>) So Joseph’s training was successful. Family heads wisely imitate Joseph, caring for the practical well-being of their children and ensuring that they can support themselves.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>31. </strong>(a) What does evidence suggest regarding the end of Joseph’s life? (Include the box.) (b) What example did Joseph leave for us to imitate?</p>
<p class="p37"><strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Once we reach the point in the Bible record where Jesus is baptized at about the age of 30, we find that Joseph is no longer part of the story. Evidence suggests that Mary was a widow by the time Jesus began his ministry. (See the box “When Did Joseph Die?”) Yet, Joseph left a clear mark<wbr />—a shining example of a father who protected his family, provided for them, and persevered faithfully to the end. Any father, any family head, or any other Christian would do well to imitate the faith of Joseph.</p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>When Did Joseph Die?</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p73">We know that Joseph was alive when Jesus was 12 years old. At that age many Jewish youths began to learn their father’s trade and became apprentices at 15. Joseph evidently lived long enough to teach Jesus to be a carpenter. Was Joseph still living when Jesus began his ministry at about 30 years of age? That seems very doubtful. Jesus’ mother, brothers, and sisters are all mentioned as living at that time but not Joseph. Jesus was once even called “the son of Mary,” not the son of Joseph. (<span id="citationsource115"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation115">Mark 6:3</a>) Mary is spoken of as acting and taking initiatives on her own, without consulting a husband. (<span id="citationsource116"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation116">John 2:1-5</a>) That would have been unusual in Bible times unless she was a widow. Finally, as he was dying, Jesus entrusted the care of his mother to the apostle John. (<span id="citationsource117"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation117">John 19:26, 27</a>) There would have been no need to do so if Joseph were still living. Likely, then, Joseph died when Jesus was still a relatively young man. As the eldest son, Jesus undoubtedly took over the carpentry business and cared for the family until his baptism.</p>
</div>
</aside></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 13:55, 56)</strong> Is this not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas? <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>And his sisters, are they not all with us? Where, then, did he get all of this?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Pss. 120:0-134:3)</strong> A Song of the Ascents.* <strong>120 </strong>I called to Jehovah in my distress, And he answered me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, rescue me* from lying lips And from the deceitful tongue.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>What will He do to you, and how will He punish you,* You deceitful tongue?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With sharp arrows of a warrior And burning coals of broomwood.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Woe to me, for I have lived as a foreigner in Meʹshech! I have been dwelling among the tents of Keʹdar.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have* been dwelling far too long With those who hate peace.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I am for peace, but when I speak, They are for war. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>121 </strong>I raise my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My help comes from Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will never allow your foot to slip.* The One guarding you will never be drowsy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! He will never be drowsy nor go to sleep, The One guarding Israel.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah is guarding you. Jehovah is the shade at your right hand.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>By day the sun will not strike you, Nor the moon by night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you against all harm. He will guard your life.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah will guard you in all you do* From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>122 </strong>I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And now our feet are standing Within your gates, O Jerusalem.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jerusalem is built as a city That is joined together as one.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The tribes have gone up to it, The tribes of Jah,* According to the reminder to Israel, To give thanks to the name of Jehovah.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For thrones for judgment were set up there, Thrones of the house of David.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Ask for the peace of Jerusalem. Those who love you, O city, will be secure.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>May peace continue within your ramparts,* Security within your fortified towers.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For the sake of my brothers and my companions I will say: “May there be peace within you.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God, I will seek good for you. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>123 </strong>To you I raise my eyes, You who are enthroned in the heavens.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, And the eyes of a servant girl to the hand of her mistress, So our eyes look to Jehovah our God Until he shows us favor.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show us favor, O Jehovah, show us favor, For we have had our full share of contempt.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have had our full share of* ridicule from the self-assured And the contempt of the arrogant. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>124 </strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“If Jehovah had not been with us When men rose up to attack us,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then they would have swallowed us up alive When their anger was burning against us.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then the waters would have washed us away, The torrent would have swept over us.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, For he has not given us as prey to their teeth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>We are* like a bird that escaped From the hunter’s trap; The trap was broken, And we escaped.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Our help is in the name of Jehovah, The Maker of heaven and earth.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>125 </strong>Those who trust in Jehovah Are like Mount Zion, which cannot be shaken But endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Just as mountains surround Jerusalem, So Jehovah surrounds his people From now on and forever.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The scepter of wickedness will not remain upon the land allotted to the righteous, So that the righteous do not turn to doing* what is wrong.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good, To those who are upright in heart.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>As for those who turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will remove them along with the wrongdoers. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>126 </strong>When Jehovah gathered back the captives of Zion, We thought we were dreaming.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>At that time our mouth was filled with laughter And our tongue with a joyful shout. At that time they said among the nations: “Jehovah has done great things for them.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah has done great things for us, And we are overjoyed.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do gather back* our captives, O Jehovah, Like streams in the Negʹeb.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Those sowing seed with tears Will reap with a joyful shout.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The one who does go out, though weeping, Carrying his bag of seed, Will surely return with a joyful shout, Carrying in his sheaves. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of Solomon. <strong>127 </strong>Unless Jehovah builds the house, It is in vain that its builders work hard on it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, It is in vain that the guard stays awake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is in vain that you rise up early, That you stay up late, That you toil for your food, Since he provides for his loved ones while giving them sleep.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>128 </strong>Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, Who walks in His ways.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You will eat what your hands worked hard to produce. You will be happy and will enjoy prosperity.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house; Your sons will be like shoots of an olive tree around your table.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Look! That is how the man who fears Jehovah Will be blessed.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jehovah will bless you from Zion. May you see Jerusalem prosper all the days of your life  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And see the sons of your sons. May there be peace upon Israel. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>129 </strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me” —Let Israel now say—  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Since my youth they have constantly attacked me; But they have not defeated me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Plowmen have plowed across my back; They have made their furrows long.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jehovah is righteous; He has cut up the ropes of the wicked.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will be put to shame and will retreat in disgrace, All those who hate Zion.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They will become like grass on the rooftops That withers before it is pulled up,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>That cannot fill the reaper’s hand Nor the arms of the one gathering sheaves.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Those passing by will not say: “May the blessing of Jehovah be upon you; We bless you in the name of Jehovah.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>130 </strong>From the depths I call to you, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Jehovah, hear my voice. May your ears pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>If errors were what you watch,* O Jah,* Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I hope in Jehovah, my whole being* hopes in him; I wait for his word.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I eagerly wait* for Jehovah, More than watchmen wait for the morning, Yes, more than watchmen wait for the morning.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let Israel keep waiting for Jehovah, For Jehovah is loyal in his love, And he has great power to redeem.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will redeem Israel from all their errors. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>131 </strong>O Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, Nor are my eyes lofty; Nor do I aspire to things too great, Or to things that are beyond me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>No, but I have calmed and quieted my soul* Like a weaned child with its mother; I am* contented like a weaned child.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let Israel wait for Jehovah From now on and forever. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>132 </strong>O Jehovah, remember David And all his suffering;  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>How he swore to Jehovah, How he vowed to the Powerful One of Jacob:  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“I will not go into my tent, my home. I will not lie upon my couch, my bed;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will not allow my eyes to sleep, Nor my eyelids to slumber  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Until I find a place for Jehovah, A fine residence* for the Powerful One of Jacob.”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Look! We heard about it in Ephʹra·thah; We found it in the fields of the forest.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let us come into his residence;* Let us bow down at his footstool.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O Jehovah, to come to your resting-place, You and the Ark of your strength.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>May your priests be clothed with righteousness, And may your loyal ones shout joyfully. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the sake of David your servant, Do not reject* your anointed one. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah has sworn to David; He will surely not go back on his word: “One of your offspring,* I will place on your throne. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If your sons keep my covenant And my reminders that I teach them, Their sons too Will sit on your throne forever.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For Jehovah has chosen Zion; He has desired it for his dwelling place: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“This is my resting-place forever; Here I will dwell, for this is my desire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will richly bless it with provisions; I will satisfy its poor with bread. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Its priests I will clothe with salvation, And its loyal ones will shout joyfully. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>There I will make the strength* of David grow. I have prepared a lamp for my anointed one. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>I will clothe his enemies with shame, But the crown* on his head will flourish.” </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. Of David. <strong>133 </strong>Look! How good and how pleasant it is For brothers to dwell together in unity!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It is like fine oil poured on the head That runs down the beard, Aaron’s beard, And runs down onto the collar of his garments.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It is like the dew of Herʹmon That descends on the mountains of Zion. That is where Jehovah decreed his blessing —Life everlasting. </p><p>A Song of the Ascents. <strong>134 </strong>Praise Jehovah, All you servants of Jehovah, You who stand in the house of Jehovah during the nights.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Raise your hands in holiness* And praise Jehovah.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the Maker of heaven and earth, Bless you from Zion.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Lit., “and what will He add to you?”</p><p>Or “My soul has.”</p><p>Or “totter.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “your going out and your coming in.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “fortified walls.”</p><p>Or “Our soul has had more than enough.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “our soul.”</p><p>Or “Our soul is.”</p><p>Or “turn their hands to.”</p><p>Or “restore.”</p><p>Or “wadis in the south.”</p><p>Or “Children.”</p><p>Or “keep track of.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul eagerly waits.”</p><p>Or “myself.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Or “A grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Or “his grand tabernacle.”</p><p>Lit., “turn back the face of.”</p><p>Lit., “of the fruit of your womb.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “diadem.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in the sanctuary.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Luke 2:41-44)</strong> Now his parents were accustomed to go from year to year to Jerusalem for the festival of the Passover. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>And when he was 12 years old, they went up according to the custom of the festival. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>When the days of the festival were over and they were returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, and his parents did not notice it. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>Assuming that he was in the group traveling together, they went a day’s journey and then began to search for him among the relatives and acquaintances.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(Luke 2:45, 46)</strong> But not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem and made a diligent search for him. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Well, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and asking them questions.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 23</span></a> <strong>(Luke 2:47, 48)</strong> But all those listening to him were in constant amazement at his understanding and his answers. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>Now when his parents saw him, they were astounded, and his mother said to him: “Child, why did you treat us this way? Here your father and I have been frantically looking for you.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 25</span></a> <strong>(Luke 2:49)</strong> But he said to them: “Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in the house of my Father?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 27</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 6:4)</strong> And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition* of Jehovah.*</p><p></p><p>Or “instruction; guidance.” Lit., “putting mind in.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <strong>(Luke 2:51, 52)</strong></a> Then he went down with them and returned to Nazʹa·reth, and he continued subject* to them. Also, his mother carefully kept all these sayings in her heart. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>And Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.</p><p></p><p>Or “remained obedient.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 28</span></a> <strong>(Luke 2:51, 52)</strong> Then he went down with them and returned to Nazʹa·reth, and he continued subject* to them. Also, his mother carefully kept all these sayings in her heart. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>And Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.</p><p></p><p>Or “remained obedient.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation114"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource114">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 30</span></a> <strong>(Mark 6:3)</strong> This is the carpenter, the son of Mary and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon, is it not? And his sisters are here with us, are they not?” So they began to stumble because of him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation115"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource115">^ <strong>(Mark 6:3)</strong></a> This is the carpenter, the son of Mary and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon, is it not? And his sisters are here with us, are they not?” So they began to stumble because of him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation116"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource116">^ <strong>(John 2:1-5)</strong></a> And on the third day a marriage feast took place in Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, and the mother of Jesus was there. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the marriage feast. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the wine ran short, the mother of Jesus said to him: “They have no wine.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jesus said to her: “Woman, why is that of concern to me and to you?* My hour has not yet come.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>His mother said to those serving: “Do whatever he tells you.”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “What to me and to you, woman?” This is an idiom indicating objection. The use of “woman” does not denote disrespect.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation117"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource117">^ <strong>(John 19:26, 27)</strong></a> So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother: “Woman, see! Your son!” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Next he said to the disciple: “See! Your mother!” And from that hour on, the disciple took her into his own home.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***ia p. 170 He Protected, He Provided, He Persevered***</strong></a></p>
<div class="boxSupplement"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>When Did Joseph Die?</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p73">We know that Joseph was alive when Jesus was 12 years old. At that age many Jewish youths began to learn their father’s trade and became apprentices at 15. Joseph evidently lived long enough to teach Jesus to be a carpenter. Was Joseph still living when Jesus began his ministry at about 30 years of age? That seems very doubtful. Jesus’ mother, brothers, and sisters are all mentioned as living at that time but not Joseph. Jesus was once even called “the son of Mary,” not the son of Joseph. (<span id="citationsource118"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation118">Mark 6:3</a>) Mary is spoken of as acting and taking initiatives on her own, without consulting a husband. (<span id="citationsource119"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation119">John 2:1-5</a>) That would have been unusual in Bible times unless she was a widow. Finally, as he was dying, Jesus entrusted the care of his mother to the apostle John. (<span id="citationsource120"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation120">John 19:26, 27</a>) There would have been no need to do so if Joseph were still living. Likely, then, Joseph died when Jesus was still a relatively young man. As the eldest son, Jesus undoubtedly took over the carpentry business and cared for the family until his baptism.</p>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation118"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource118">^ <strong>(Mark 6:3)</strong></a> This is the carpenter, the son of Mary and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon, is it not? And his sisters are here with us, are they not?” So they began to stumble because of him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation119"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource119">^ <strong>(John 2:1-5)</strong></a> And on the third day a marriage feast took place in Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, and the mother of Jesus was there. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the marriage feast. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the wine ran short, the mother of Jesus said to him: “They have no wine.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jesus said to her: “Woman, why is that of concern to me and to you?* My hour has not yet come.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>His mother said to those serving: “Do whatever he tells you.”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “What to me and to you, woman?” This is an idiom indicating objection. The use of “woman” does not denote disrespect.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation120"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource120">^ <strong>(John 19:26, 27)</strong></a> So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother: “Woman, see! Your son!” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Next he said to the disciple: “See! Your mother!” And from that hour on, the disciple took her into his own home.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***ia chap. 19 He Protected, He Provided, He Persevered***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>TO THINK ABOUT . . .</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p43">  In what ways did Joseph act to protect his family?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p44">  How did Joseph provide for those who were his own?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p45">  What shows that Joseph persevered in his God-given assignment?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p46">  In what ways would you like to imitate the example of Joseph?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016244.xhtml#pcitationsource17">^ <span id="pcitation17"></span><strong>***sn song 123 Shepherds—Gifts in Men***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 123</p>
<h1><strong>Shepherds<wbr />—Gifts in Men</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource121"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation121">Ephesians 4:8</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Help in our lives, Jehovah provides,</p>
<p class="p5">Shepherds to tend his flock.</p>
<p class="p6">By their example they serve as guides,</p>
<p class="p7">Showing us how to walk.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">God gives us men who have earned our trust,</p>
<p class="p10">Men who are loyal and true.</p>
<p class="p11">They show concern for his precious flock;</p>
<p class="p12">Love them for all that they do.</p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. Shepherds who love us care how we feel;</p>
<p class="p14">Gently they guide the way.</p>
<p class="p15">When we are hurt, they help us to heal,</p>
<p class="p16">Kind in the words they say.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">God gives us men who have earned our trust,</p>
<p class="p19">Men who are loyal and true.</p>
<p class="p20">They show concern for his precious flock;</p>
<p class="p21">Love them for all that they do.</p>
</div>
<p class="p22">3. Godly advice and counsel they give,</p>
<p class="p23">That we may never stray.</p>
<p class="p24">Thus they assist us, God’s way to live,</p>
<p class="p25">Serving him ev’ry day.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p26">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p27">God gives us men who have earned our trust,</p>
<p class="p28">Men who are loyal and true.</p>
<p class="p29">They show concern for his precious flock;</p>
<p class="p30">Love them for all that they do.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p31">(See also <span id="citationsource122"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation122">Isa. 32:1, 2;</a><span id="citationsource123"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation123"> Jer. 3:15;</a><span id="citationsource124"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation124"> John 21:15-17;</a><span id="citationsource125"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation125"> Acts 20:28</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation121"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource121">^ <strong>(Eph. 4:8)</strong></a> For it says: “When he ascended on high he carried away captives; he gave gifts in men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation122"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource122">^ <strong>(Isa. 32:1, 2)</strong></a> Look! A king will reign for righteousness, And princes will rule for justice.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And each one will be like a hiding place* from the wind, A place of concealment* from the rainstorm, Like streams of water in a waterless land, Like the shadow of a massive crag in a parched land.</p><p></p><p>Or “a shelter.”</p><p>Or “A refuge.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation123"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource123">^ <strong>(Jer. 3:15)</strong></a> And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, and they will feed you with knowledge and insight.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation124"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource124">^ <strong>(John 21:15-17)</strong></a> When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” He replied to him: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Feed my lambs.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Again he said to him a second time: “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He replied: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Shepherd my little sheep.” <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>He said to him a third time: “Simon son of John, do you have affection for me?” Peter became grieved that he asked him the third time: “Do you have affection for me?” So he said to him: “Lord, you are aware of all things; you know that I have affection for you.” Jesus said to him: “Feed my little sheep.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation125"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource125">^ <strong>(Acts 20:28)</strong></a> Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood of his own Son.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
