<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 July 4-10</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016241.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 60:0-68:35)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>To the director; set to “The Lily of Reminder.” Mikʹtam.* Of David. For teaching. When he fought with Aʹram-na·ha·raʹim and Aʹram-Zoʹbah, and Joʹab returned and struck down 12,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt. <strong>60 </strong>O God, you rejected us; you broke through our defenses. You were angry with us; but now accept us back!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You caused the earth to quake; you split it open. Repair its breaches, for it is falling.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You caused your people to suffer hardship. You made us drink wine that makes us stagger.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Give* a signal to those fearing you To flee and dodge the bow. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer us.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>God has spoken in his holiness:* “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley* of Sucʹcoth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet* for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Who will bring me to the besieged* city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries. </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Of David. <strong>61 </strong>Hear, O God, my cry for help. Do pay attention to my prayer.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>From the ends of the earth I will cry out to you When my heart is in despair.* Lead me onto a rock that is higher than I am.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For you are my refuge, A strong tower that protects me from the enemy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will be a guest in your tent forever; I will take refuge in the shelter of your wings. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O God, have heard my vows. You have given me the inheritance belonging to those who fear your name.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You will add days to the life* of the king, And his years will be from generation to generation.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He will sit enthroned* forever before God; Grant him* loyal love and faithfulness, so that these may safeguard him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then I will sing praises* to your name forever As I pay my vows day after day. </p><p>To the director; of Je·duʹthun.* A melody of David. <strong>62 </strong>Indeed, I wait* silently for God. My salvation comes from him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;* I will never be greatly shaken.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>How long will you assault a man in order to murder him? All of you are as dangerous as a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they consult together to topple him from his high position;* They take pleasure in lying. With their mouth they bless, but inside they are cursing. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Indeed, I wait silently* for God Because my hope comes from him.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge; I will never be shaken.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Upon God depends my salvation and my glory. My strong rock, my refuge, is God.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Trust in him at all times, O people. Pour out your hearts before him. God is a refuge for us. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The sons of men are a mere breath, The sons of mankind are a delusion. When laid together on the scales, they are lighter than a mere breath. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Do not trust in extortion Or put false hopes in robbery. If your wealth increases, do not set your heart on it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Once God has spoken, twice I have heard this: That strength belongs to God. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Also loyal love is yours, O Jehovah, For you repay each one according to his deeds. </p><p>A melody of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. <strong>63 </strong>O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you. I do thirst* for you. I am* faint with longing for you In a dry and parched land, where there is no water.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So I have looked upon you in the holy place; I have seen your strength and your glory.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Because your loyal love is better than life, My own lips will glorify you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Thus I will praise you all my life; In your name I will lift up my hands.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I am* satisfied with the best and choicest portion,* So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I cling* to you; Your right hand keeps fast hold on me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But those who seek to destroy my life* Will descend into the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They will be handed over to the power of the sword; They will become food for jackals.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the king will rejoice in God. Every person swearing by Him will exult,* For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced. </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. <strong>64 </strong>Hear my voice, O God, as I plead. Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men, From the crowd of wrongdoers.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They sharpen their tongue just like a sword; They aim their cruel words like arrows,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places; They shoot at him suddenly, without fear.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They hold fast to their evil intent;* They discuss how to hide their traps. They say: “Who will see them?”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They search out new ways of wrongdoing; They secretly devise their shrewd strategy; The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But God will shoot at them; Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Their own tongue will cause their downfall; All those looking on will shake their head.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then all men will become afraid, And they will proclaim what God has done, And they will have insight into his deeds. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him; All the upright in heart will exult.* </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. A song. <strong>65 </strong>Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion; We will pay our vows to you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>My errors have overwhelmed me, But you cover over our transgressions.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Happy is the one whom you choose and bring near To reside in your courtyards. We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house, Your holy temple.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You will answer us with awe-inspiring deeds of righteousness, O God of our salvation; You are the Confidence of all the ends of the earth And of those distant across the sea.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You* firmly established the mountains by your power; You* are clothed with mightiness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>You* calm the raging seas, The crash of their waves and the turmoil of the nations.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The inhabitants of remote places will be awestruck by your signs; You will cause those from the sunrise to the sunset to shout joyfully.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You care for the earth, Making it abundantly fruitful* and very rich. The stream from God is full of water; You provide grain for them, For that is how you prepared the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You drench its furrows and level off its plowed soil;* You soften it with showers of rain; you bless its growth. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You crown the year with your goodness; Your tracks overflow with abundance.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The pastures of the wilderness keep overflowing,* And the hills are clothed with joyfulness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The pastures are covered with flocks, And the valleys* are carpeted with grain. They shout in triumph, yes, they sing. </p><p>To the director. A song. A melody. <strong>66 </strong>Shout in triumph to God, all the earth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing praises* to his glorious name. Make his praise glorious.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are! Because of your great power, Your enemies will cringe before you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>All the earth will bow down to you; They will sing praises to you; They will sing praises to your name.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Come and see the works of God. His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He changed the sea into dry land; They crossed the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He rules forever by his might. His eyes keep watch on the nations. Those who are stubborn should not exalt themselves. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Praise our God, you peoples, And let the sound of his praise be heard.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He preserves us alive;* He does not allow our feet to stumble.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you have examined us, O God; As silver is refined, so you have refined us. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You brought us into a hunting net; You put a crushing burden upon us.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You allowed mortal man to ride over us;* We came through fire and through water; Then you brought us to a place of relief. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will come into your house with whole burnt offerings; I will pay my vows to you <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>That my lips promised And my mouth spoke when I was in distress. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will offer burnt offerings of fattened animals to you With the smoke of sacrificial rams. I will offer bulls along with male goats. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Come and listen, all you who fear God, And I will tell you what he has done for me.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I called to him with my mouth And glorified him with my tongue. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I had harbored anything hurtful in my heart, Jehovah would not have heard me. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But God did hear; He paid attention to my prayer. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Praise to God, who did not reject my prayer Or withhold his loyal love from me. </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody. A song. <strong>67 </strong>God will show us favor and bless us; He will make his face shine upon us (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So that your way may be known throughout the earth, Your acts of salvation among all the nations.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let nations rejoice and shout joyfully, For you will judge the peoples fairly. You will guide the nations of the earth. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The earth will give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God will bless us, And all the ends of the earth will fear* him. </p><p>To the director. Of David. A melody. A song. <strong>68 </strong>Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered, And let those who hate him flee from before him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As smoke is driven away, may you drive them away; As wax melts before the fire, So let the wicked perish before God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>But let the righteous rejoice; May they be overjoyed before God; May they exult with rejoicing.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Sing to God; sing praises* to his name. Sing to the One riding through the desert plains.* Jah* is his name! Rejoice before him!  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A father of the fatherless and a protector* of widows Is God in his holy dwelling.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in; He leads prisoners out into prosperity. But the stubborn* must live in a parched land.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O God, when you led* your people, When you marched through the desert, (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The earth quaked; Heaven poured down rain* because of God; This Siʹnai quaked because of God, the God of Israel.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You made it rain in abundance, O God; You reinvigorated your exhausted people.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They dwelled in your tent community; In your goodness, you provided for the poor, O God. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah gives the command; The women proclaiming the good news are a large army. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The kings of armies flee, they flee! She who remains at home shares in the spoil. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Although you men were lying among the campfires,* There will be the wings of a dove covered with silver, With pinions of fine* gold. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When the Almighty One scattered its kings, Snow fell in Zalʹmon.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of God;* The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of peaks. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Why do you look with envy, you mountains of peaks, Toward the mountain that God has chosen* as his dwelling? Indeed, Jehovah will reside there forever. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The war chariots of God are tens of thousands, thousands upon thousands. Jehovah has come from Siʹnai into the holy place. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>You ascended on high; You carried away captives; You took gifts in the form of men, Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load, The true God of our salvation. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The true God is for us a God who saves; And Jehovah the Sovereign Lord provides escape from death. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Yes, God will smash the heads of his enemies, The hairy crown of the head of anyone who continues* in his guilt. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jehovah has said: “I will bring them back from Baʹshan; I will bring them back from the depths of the sea, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So that your foot may be awash in blood And the tongue of your dogs may have its portion from the enemies.” <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They see your processions, O God, The processions of my God, my King, into the holy place. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The singers walk in front, the musicians playing stringed instruments after them; In between are the young women playing tambourines. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In congregated throngs,* praise God; Praise Jehovah, you who are from the Source of Israel. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>There Benjamin, the youngest, is subduing them, Also the princes of Judah with their noisy crowd, The princes of Zebʹu·lun, the princes of Naphʹta·li. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Your God has decreed that you will be strong. Show your strength, O God, you who have acted in our behalf. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Because of your temple at Jerusalem, Kings will bring gifts to you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds, The assembly of bulls and their calves, Until the peoples bow down bringing* pieces of silver. But he scatters the peoples who delight in war. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Bronze articles will be brought* out of Egypt; Cush will hasten to offer gifts to God. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God, Sing praises* to Jehovah, (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>To the one who rides the ancient heaven of heavens. Look! He thunders with his voice, his mighty voice. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Acknowledge God’s strength. His majesty is over Israel, And his strength is in the skies.* <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>God is awe-inspiring from his* grand sanctuary. He is the God of Israel, Who gives strength and power to the people. Praise to God.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “You have given.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in his holy place.”</p><p>Or “Low Plain.”</p><p>Lit., “stronghold.”</p><p>Or possibly, “fortified.”</p><p>Or “grows feeble.”</p><p>Lit., “days.”</p><p>Or “will dwell.”</p><p>Or “Assign.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul waits.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Or possibly, “All of you, as if he were a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.”</p><p>Or “his dignity.”</p><p>Or “wait silently, O my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul thirsts.”</p><p>Lit., “My flesh is.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “as with fat and fatness.”</p><p>Or “My soul clings.”</p><p>Or “destroy my soul; kill me.”</p><p>Or “foxes.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Or “They encourage one another to do evil.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Or “sanctuary.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “making it overflow.”</p><p>Or “its ridges.”</p><p>Lit., “drip with fatness.”</p><p>Lit., “dripping.”</p><p>Or “low plains.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “sets our soul in life.”</p><p>Or “stagger; totter.”</p><p>Lit., “on our hips.”</p><p>Lit., “our head.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “honor.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “on the clouds.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Or “rebellious.”</p><p>Lit., “went out before.”</p><p>Lit., “dripped.”</p><p>Lit., “inheritance.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the sheepfolds.”</p><p>Or “yellowish-green.”</p><p>Or “It was as if it snowed in Zalmon.”</p><p>Or “a majestic mountain.”</p><p>Or “desires.”</p><p>Or “walks about.”</p><p>Lit., “In assemblies.”</p><p>Or possibly, “stamping down on.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Ambassadors will come.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Lit., “clouds.”</p><p>Lit., “your.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016241.xhtml#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Pss. 63:1-64:10)</strong></a> <span id="citation8"></span>O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you. I do thirst* for you. I am* faint with longing for you In a dry and parched land, where there is no water.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So I have looked upon you in the holy place; I have seen your strength and your glory.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Because your loyal love is better than life, My own lips will glorify you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Thus I will praise you all my life; In your name I will lift up my hands.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I am* satisfied with the best and choicest portion,* So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I cling* to you; Your right hand keeps fast hold on me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But those who seek to destroy my life* Will descend into the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They will be handed over to the power of the sword; They will become food for jackals.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the king will rejoice in God. Every person swearing by Him will exult,* For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced. </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. <strong>64 </strong>Hear my voice, O God, as I plead. Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men, From the crowd of wrongdoers.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They sharpen their tongue just like a sword; They aim their cruel words like arrows,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places; They shoot at him suddenly, without fear.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They hold fast to their evil intent;* They discuss how to hide their traps. They say: “Who will see them?”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They search out new ways of wrongdoing; They secretly devise their shrewd strategy; The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But God will shoot at them; Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Their own tongue will cause their downfall; All those looking on will shake their head.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then all men will become afraid, And they will proclaim what God has done, And they will have insight into his deeds. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him; All the upright in heart will exult.*</p><p></p><p>Or “My soul thirsts.”</p><p>Lit., “My flesh is.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “as with fat and fatness.”</p><p>Or “My soul clings.”</p><p>Or “destroy my soul; kill me.”</p><p>Or “foxes.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Or “They encourage one another to do evil.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 104 Praise Jah With Me***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 104</p>
<h1><strong>Praise Jah With Me</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Psalm 146:2</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Praise Jah with me;</p>
<p class="p5">Loud let it ring!</p>
<p class="p6">He gives us life, breath, and ev’ry good thing.</p>
<p class="p7">Each day and night,</p>
<p class="p8">His name we bless.</p>
<p class="p9">His perfect love clothes His almightiness.</p>
<p class="p10">We sing his praise, and his name we confess.</p>
<p class="p11">2. Praise Jah with me.</p>
<p class="p12">He satisfies</p>
<p class="p13">And hears our prayers as our needs he supplies.</p>
<p class="p14">His mighty arm</p>
<p class="p15">Strengthens the weak;</p>
<p class="p16">His holy spirit sustains all the meek.</p>
<p class="p17">His name we praise; Of his power we speak.</p>
<p class="p18">3. Praise Jah with me.</p>
<p class="p19">Our God is just;</p>
<p class="p20">He brings all comfort, in him we can trust.</p>
<p class="p21">Wrongs he will right;</p>
<p class="p22">Hearts he will heal.</p>
<p class="p23">Rich Kingdom blessings all mankind will feel.</p>
<p class="p24">Come let us praise him with joy and with zeal!</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p25">(See also <span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Ps. 94:18, 19;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> 145:21;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 147:1;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> 150:2</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 146:2)</strong></a> I will praise Jehovah all my life. I will sing praises* to my God as long as I live.</p><p></p><p>Or “make music.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 94:18, 19)</strong></a> When I said: “My foot is slipping,” Your loyal love, O Jehovah, kept supporting me. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When anxieties* overwhelmed me,* You comforted and soothed me.*</p><p></p><p>Or “disquieting thoughts.”</p><p>Or “became many inside of me.”</p><p>Or “Your consolations soothed my soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:21)</strong></a> My mouth will declare the praise of Jehovah; Let every living thing* praise his holy name forever and ever.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 147:1)</strong></a> Praise Jah!* It is good to sing praises* to our God; How pleasant and fitting it is to praise him!</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “make music.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Ps. 150:2)</strong></a> Praise him for his mighty works. Praise him for his exceeding greatness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w99 9/15 p. 9 Why Keep Your Promises?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p13">Our dedication to God is undoubtedly the most important promise we can make. By taking this step, we demonstrate that we want to serve Jehovah forever. While God’s commandments are not burdensome, it may not always be easy to do his will, living as we do in this wicked system of things. (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">2 Timothy 3:12;</a><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"> 1 John 5:3</a>) But once we have ‘put our hand to the plow’ and have become dedicated servants of Jehovah and disciples of his Son, Jesus Christ, we should never look back at the things of the world that we have left behind.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Luke 9:62</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">When we pray to Jehovah, we may feel moved to promise him that we will fight to overcome a weakness, cultivate a Christian quality, or increase some aspect of our theocratic activity. What will help us follow through on these promises?<wbr />—Compare <span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Ecclesiastes 5:2-5</a>.</p>
<p class="p15">Sincere promises stem from the heart as well as the mind. Therefore, let us back up our promises to Jehovah by opening our hearts to him in prayer, honestly expressing our fears, desires, and weaknesses. Praying about a promise will strengthen our resolve to keep it. We could look on our promises to God as debts. When debts are large, payment has to be made gradually. Likewise, many promises we make to Jehovah will take time to fulfill. But by regularly giving him what we can, we show that we mean what we say, and he will bless us accordingly.</p>
<p class="p16">We can demonstrate that we take our promises seriously by praying about them often, perhaps each day. This will show our heavenly Father that we are sincere. It will also serve as a regular reminder. David left us a fine example in this regard. In song, he beseeched Jehovah: “Do hear, O God, my entreating cry. Do pay attention to my prayer. . . . I will make melody to your name forever, that I may pay my vows day after day.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Psalm 61:1,</a><span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19"> 8</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:12)</strong></a> In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(1 John 5:3)</strong></a> For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Luke 9:62)</strong></a> Jesus said to him: “No man who has put his hand to a plow and looks at the things behind is well-suited for the Kingdom of God.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Eccl. 5:2-5)</strong></a> Do not be quick with your mouth, nor let your heart speak rashly before the true God, for the true God is in the heavens but you are on the earth. That is why your words should be few. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For a dream comes from too many preoccupations,* and the chatter of the stupid one comes from too many words. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Whenever you make a vow to God, do not delay to pay it, for he finds no pleasure in the stupid ones. What you vow, pay. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Better for you not to vow than to vow and not pay.</p><p></p><p>Or “too many cares.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Ps. 61:1)</strong></a> Hear, O God, my cry for help. Do pay attention to my prayer.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Ps. 61:8)</strong></a> Then I will sing praises* to your name forever As I pay my vows day after day.</p><p></p><p>Or “make music.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w15 4/15 pp. 25-26 Always Trust in Jehovah!***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>TRUST IS ESSENTIAL TO OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>Why might it be especially challenging to trust in Jehovah when we are under stress?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Can you bring a distressing problem to Jehovah in prayer and thereafter be at peace, knowing that you have done what you can about the situation and he will handle the rest? Yes, you can! <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20"><strong>Psalm 62:8;</strong></a><span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21"> <strong>1 Peter 5:7</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Learning to do so is an important aspect of developing a relationship with Jehovah. Yet, trusting that Jehovah will provide what you need can be quite a challenge. Why? One reason may be that Jehovah does not always respond right away.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Ps. 13:1, 2;</a><span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23"> 74:10;</a><span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24"> 89:46;</a><span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25"> 90:13;</a><span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26"> Hab. 1:2</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>7. </strong>Why does Jehovah not always answer our prayers immediately?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Why does Jehovah not give us an immediate response to our every request? Recall that he likens our relationship with him to that of children with a father. (<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Ps. 103:13</a>) A child cannot rightly expect a parent to grant every request or to do so right away. Some of a child’s requests may be mere passing whims. Others must wait till the time is right. Still others may not be in the child’s best interests or in the best interests of others involved. Furthermore, to concede immediately to a child’s every request would change the relationship to one of master and slave, the child being the master. Similarly, Jehovah may in our best interests allow time to pass before his response to our prayers becomes evident. That is his prerogative as our wise Creator, loving Master, and heavenly Father. Fulfilling all our requests right away would distort the proper relationship between us and him.<wbr />—Compare <span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Isaiah 29:16;</a><span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29"> 45:9</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>8. </strong>What does Jehovah promise with regard to our personal limitations?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Another factor is that Jehovah is fully aware of our limitations. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Ps. 103:14</a>) Therefore, he does not expect us to endure in our own strength but offers us his fatherly help. Of course, at times, we might feel that we cannot go on anymore. But Jehovah assures us that he will never allow his servants to suffer beyond their limit of endurance. Yes, he will “make the way out.” <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31"><strong>1 Corinthians 10:13</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Therefore, we have good reason to trust that Jehovah’s assessment of what we can bear is right.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>9. </strong>What should we do when relief does not immediately follow our prayers for help?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When relief does not immediately follow our prayers for help, let us wait on the One who knows just when to act in our behalf. Remember that he too is exercising patience, for he is ever eager to come to our rescue. “Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor, and he will rise up to show you mercy. For Jehovah is a God of justice. Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Isa. 30:18</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 62:8)</strong> Trust in him at all times, O people. Pour out your hearts before him. God is a refuge for us. (<em>Selah</em>)</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:7)</strong> while you throw all your anxiety* on him, because he cares for you.</p><p></p><p>Or “cares; worries.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 13:1, 2)</strong> How long, O Jehovah, will you forget me? Forever? How long will you hide your face from me?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>How long will I* have anxious concern, With grief in my heart each day? How long will my enemy triumph over me?</p><p></p><p>Or “my soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 74:10)</strong> How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting? Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 89:46)</strong> How long, O Jehovah, will you hide yourself? Will it be forever? Will your rage continue to burn like a fire?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 90:13)</strong> Return, O Jehovah! How long will this last? Have pity on your servants.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Hab. 1:2)</strong> How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, but you do not hear? How long must I ask for help from violence, but you do not intervene?*</p><p></p><p>Or “save.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:13)</strong> As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 29:16)</strong> How you twist things!* Should the potter be regarded the same as the clay? Should what is made say about its maker: “He did not make me”? And does what is formed say about its former: “He shows no understanding”?</p><p></p><p>Or “How perverse of you!”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 45:9)</strong> Woe to the one who contends* with his Maker,* For he is just an earthenware fragment Among the other earthenware fragments lying on the ground! Should the clay say to the Potter:* “What are you making?” Or should your work say: “He has no hands”?*</p><p></p><p>Or “argues.”</p><p>Or “with the One who formed him.”</p><p>Or “the One who formed it.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Or should the clay say: ‘Your work has no handles’?”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:14)</strong> For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 10:13)</strong> No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 30:18)</strong> But Jehovah is waiting patiently* to show you favor, And he will rise up to show you mercy. For Jehovah is a God of justice. Happy are all those keeping in expectation of* him.</p><p></p><p>Or “keeping in expectation.”</p><p>Or “eagerly waiting for.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w15 4/15 pp. 22-23 How Real Is Your Relationship With Jehovah?***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p21"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Consider this: From his prehuman existence, Jesus observed firsthand Jehovah’s response to the prayers of His human servants. Then, during his earthly ministry, Jesus used prayer as his means of communicating his feelings to his Father in heaven. Would he have done so<wbr />—even spending an entire night in prayer—<wbr />had he thought that Jehovah was not really listening? (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Luke 6:12;</a><span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34"> 22:40-46</a>) Would he have taught his disciples to pray had he thought that prayer was nothing more than a psychological crutch? Clearly, Jesus knew that prayer is real communication with Jehovah. On one occasion, Jesus said: “Father, I thank you that you have heard me. True, I knew that you always hear me.” We too can have confidence that Jehovah is the “Hearer of prayer.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">John 11:41, 42;</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> Ps. 65:2</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>14, 15. </strong>(a) How do we benefit from being specific in our prayers? (b) How did one sisterʼs prayers help her strengthen her bond with Jehovah?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When you are specific in your prayers, you become more keenly aware of Jehovah’s answers, even though they may be subtle. Answered prayers will make Jehovah more real to you. In addition, the more you express your innermost concerns to Jehovah, the closer he will draw to you.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Luke 6:12)</strong> On one of those days he went out to the mountain to pray, and he spent the whole night in prayer to God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Luke 22:40-46)</strong> On arriving at the place, he said to them: “Carry on prayer so that you do not enter into temptation.” <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>And he withdrew from them about a stone’s throw away, and he bent his knees and began to pray, <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>saying: “Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, let, not my will, but yours take place.” <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>But he was in such agony that he kept praying more earnestly; and his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>When he rose from prayer and went to the disciples, he found them slumbering, exhausted from grief. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He said to them: “Why are you sleeping? Get up and keep praying, so that you do not enter into temptation.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(John 11:41, 42)</strong> So they took the stone away. Then Jesus raised his eyes heavenward and said: “Father, I thank you that you have heard me. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>True, I knew that you always hear me; but I spoke on account of the crowd standing around, so that they may believe that you sent me.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 65:2)</strong> O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w10 4/15 p. 5 Young People—Strengthen Your Desire to Serve Jehovah***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p14"><strong>How Prayer Deepens Your Love for Jehovah</strong></p>
<p class="qu">10, 11. How does prayer help you to strengthen your desire to serve God?</p>
<p class="p15"><sup>10 </sup>The second way in which you can strengthen your desire to serve Jehovah wholeheartedly is by means of your prayers. At <span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Psalm 65:2</a>, we read: “O Hearer of prayer, even to you people of all flesh will come.” Even during the time that Israel was God’s covenant people, foreigners who came to Jehovah’s temple could approach him in prayer. (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">1 Ki. 8:41, 42</a>) God is not partial. Those who observe his commandments have the assurance that he will listen to them. (<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Prov. 15:8</a>) Surely, “people of all flesh” include you young ones.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 65:2)</strong> O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(1 Ki. 8:41, 42)</strong> “Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your name* <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>(for they will hear about your great name and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm), and he comes and prays toward this house,</p><p></p><p>Or “reputation.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 15:8)</strong> The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah, But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***it-2 p. 668 Prayer***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p7"><strong>Those Whom God Hears. </strong>People “of all flesh” may come to the “Hearer of prayer,” Jehovah God. (<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Ps 65:2;</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> Ac 15:17</a>) Even during the period that Israel was God’s “private property,” his covenant people, foreigners could approach Jehovah in prayer by recognizing Israel as God’s appointed instrument and the temple at Jerusalem as his chosen place for sacrifice. (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">De 9:29;</a><span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43"> 2Ch 6:32, 33</a>; compare <span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Isa 19:22</a>.) Later, by Christ’s death, the distinction between Jew and Gentile was forever removed. (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Eph 2:11-16</a>) At the home of the Italian Cornelius, Peter recognized that “God is not partial, but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.” (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Ac 10:34, 35</a>) The determining factor, then, is the heart of the individual and what his heart is moving him to do. (<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Ps 119:145;</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> La 3:41</a>) Those who observe God’s commandments and do “the things that are pleasing in his eyes” have the assurance that his “ears” are also open to them.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">1Jo 3:22;</a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> Ps 10:17;</a><span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51"> Pr 15:8;</a><span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52"> 1Pe 3:12</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Ps. 65:2)</strong></a> O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Acts 15:17)</strong></a> so that the men who remain may earnestly seek Jehovah,* together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name, says Jehovah,* who is doing these things,</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Deut. 9:29)</strong></a> For they are your people and your personal possession,* whom you brought out with your great power and your outstretched arm.’</p><p></p><p>Or “your inheritance.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(2 Chron. 6:32, 33)</strong></a> “Also concerning the foreigner who is not part of your people Israel and who comes from a distant land because of your great name* and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm, and he comes and prays toward this house, <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>may you then listen from the heavens, your dwelling place, and do all that the foreigner asks of you, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as your people Israel do, and may know that your name has been called on this house that I have built.</p><p></p><p>Or “reputation.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Isa. 19:22)</strong></a> Jehovah will strike Egypt, striking and healing it; and they will return to Jehovah, and he will respond to their entreaties and heal them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Eph. 2:11-16)</strong></a> Therefore, remember that at one time you, people of the nations by fleshly descent, were the ones called “uncircumcision” by those called “circumcision,” which is made in the flesh by human hands. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>At that time you were without Christ, alienated from the state of Israel, strangers to the covenants of the promise; you had no hope and were without God in the world. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But now in union with Christ Jesus, you who were once far off have come to be near by the blood of the Christ. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For he is our peace, the one who made the two groups one and destroyed the wall in between that fenced them off. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>By means of his flesh he abolished the enmity, the Law of commandments consisting in decrees, in order to make the two groups in union with himself into one new man and to make peace, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>and to reconcile fully both peoples in one body to God through the torture stake,* because he had killed off the enmity by means of himself.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Acts 10:34, 35)</strong></a> At this Peter began to speak, and he said: “Now I truly understand that God is not partial, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>but in every nation the man who fears him and does what is right is acceptable to him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:145)</strong></a> I call with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. Your regulations I will observe.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Lam. 3:41)</strong></a> Let us lift up our hearts along with our hands to God in the heavens:</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(1 John 3:22)</strong></a> and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we are observing his commandments and doing what is pleasing in his eyes.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(Ps. 10:17)</strong></a> But you will hear the request of the meek, O Jehovah. You will make their hearts firm and pay close attention to them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Prov. 15:8)</strong></a> The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to Jehovah, But the prayer of the upright is a pleasure to Him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 3:12)</strong></a> For the eyes of Jehovah* are on the righteous, and his ears listen to their supplication, but the face of Jehovah* is against those doing bad things.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w06 6/1 p. 11 par. 7 Highlights From Book Two of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p43"><span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53"><strong>63:3</strong></a><strong>. </strong>God’s “loving-kindness is better than life” because without it, life is meaningless and purposeless. We are wise to cultivate friendship with Jehovah.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 63:3)</strong> Because your loyal love is better than life, My own lips will glorify you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w06 6/1 p. 10 par. 5 Highlights From Book Two of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p31"><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"><strong>68:18</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—Who were the “gifts in the form of men”? </strong>These were men from among those taken captive during the conquest of the Promised Land. Such men were later assigned to assist the Levites in their work.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Ezra 8:20</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 68:18)</strong> You ascended on high; You carried away captives; You took gifts in the form of men, Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ezra 8:20)</strong> And there were 220 of the temple servants,* whom David and the princes gave to the service of the Levites, all of whom had been designated by name.</p><p></p><p>Or “the Nethinim.” Lit., “the given ones.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***sn song 81 “Give Us More Faith”***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 81</p>
<h1><strong>“Give Us More Faith”</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Luke 17:5</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Because we are imperfect, O Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p5">The inclination of our heart is flawed.</p>
<p class="p6">There is a sin that easily ensnares us<wbr />—</p>
<p class="p7">A lack of faith in you, the living God.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">Give us more faith, we beg of you, Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p10">Please help us out according to our need.</p>
<p class="p11">Give us more faith, according to your mercy,</p>
<p class="p12">That we may honor you in word and deed<em>.</em></p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. Apart from faith, no one can fully please you.</p>
<p class="p14">We must believe our faith will be repaid.</p>
<p class="p15">And as a shield, our faith provides a refuge.</p>
<p class="p16">We face the future firm and unafraid.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">Give us more faith, we beg of you, Jehovah.</p>
<p class="p19">Please help us out according to our need.</p>
<p class="p20">Give us more faith, according to your mercy,</p>
<p class="p21">That we may honor you in word and deed<em>.</em></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p22">(See also <span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Gen. 8:21;</a><span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58"> Heb. 11:6;</a><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"> 12:1</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Luke 17:5)</strong></a> Now the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <strong>(Gen. 8:21)</strong></a> And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing* aroma. So Jehovah said in his heart: “Never again will I curse* the ground on man’s account, for the inclination of the heart of man is bad from his youth up; and never again will I strike down every living thing as I have done.</p><p></p><p>Or “appeasing; soothing.” Lit., “restful.”</p><p>Or “call down evil upon.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Heb. 11:6)</strong></a> Moreover, without faith it is impossible to please God well, for whoever approaches God must believe that he is* and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.</p><p></p><p>Or “exists.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Heb. 12:1)</strong></a> So, then, because we have such a great cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also throw off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***ia pp. 162-166 He Protected, He Provided, He Persevered***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1, 2. </strong>(a) What changes did Joseph and his family face? (b) What bad news did Joseph have to tell his wife?</p>
<p class="p3">JOSEPH swung another load onto the donkey’s back. Picture him looking around at the darkened village of Bethlehem and patting the flank of the sturdy beast of burden. He was surely thinking of the long trip ahead. Egypt! A foreign people, a foreign tongue, foreign customs<wbr />—how would his little family adapt to so much change?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It was not easy to tell the bad news to his beloved wife, Mary, but Joseph braced himself and did it. He told her of the dream in which an angel delivered this message from God: The king, Herod, wanted their little son dead! They had to leave right away. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60"><strong><em>Matthew 2:13, 14</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>Mary was deeply concerned. How could anyone want to kill her innocent, harmless child? Neither Mary nor Joseph could fathom it. But they trusted in Jehovah, so they readied themselves.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>3. </strong>Describe the departure of Joseph and his family from Bethlehem. (See also the picture.)</p>
<p class="p5"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Unaware of the unfolding drama, Bethlehem slept as Joseph, Mary, and Jesus slipped out of the village in the darkness. Heading southward, with the sky beginning to lighten in the east, Joseph likely wondered what lay ahead. How could a lowly carpenter protect his family against forces so powerful? Would he always be able to provide for his own? Would he manage to persevere in carrying out this heavy assignment that Jehovah God had given him, to care for and raise this unique child? Joseph faced daunting challenges. As we consider how he rose to meet each one, we will see why fathers today<wbr />—and all of us—<wbr />need to imitate the faith of Joseph.</p>
<h2><strong>Joseph Protected His Family</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>4, 5. </strong>(a) How did Joseph’s life change forever? (b) How did an angel encourage Joseph to take on a weighty assignment?</p>
<p class="p7"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Months earlier, in his hometown of Nazareth, Joseph found that his life changed forever after his engagement to the daughter of Heli. Joseph knew Mary as an innocent, faithful young woman. But then he learned that she was pregnant! He intended to divorce her secretly to protect her from scandal.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> However, an angel spoke to him in a dream, explaining that Mary was pregnant by means of Jehovah’s holy spirit. The angel added that the son she bore would “save his people from their sins.” He further reassured Joseph: “Do not be afraid to take Mary your wife home.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Matt. 1:18-21</a>.</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Joseph, a righteous and obedient man, did just that. He took on the weightiest of assignments: raising and caring for a son who was not his own but who was most precious to God. Later, in obedience to an imperial decree, Joseph and his pregnant wife went to Bethlehem to register. It was there that the child was born.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>6-8. </strong>(a) What events led to another change in the lives of Joseph and his little family? (b) What evidence suggests that Satan sent the “star”? (See also footnote.)</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Joseph did not take the family back to Nazareth. Instead, they settled in Bethlehem, just a few miles (about 10 km) from Jerusalem. They were poor, but Joseph did all he could to protect Mary and Jesus from want or suffering. In a short time, they took up living in a humble home. Then, when Jesus was no longer a baby but a small child<wbr />—perhaps over a year old—<wbr />their lives suddenly changed again.</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>A group of men arrived, astrologers from the East, likely from faraway Babylon. They had followed a “star” to the home of Joseph and Mary and were looking for a child who was to become king of the Jews. The men were deeply respectful.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Whether they knew it or not, the astrologers had put little Jesus in great peril. The “star” they had seen led them first, not to Bethlehem, but to Jerusalem.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> There they told wicked King Herod that they were looking for a child who was to become king of the Jews. Their report filled the man with jealous rage.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>9-11. </strong>(a) In what ways were forces greater than Herod or Satan at work? (b) How did the journey to Egypt differ from what is described in apocryphal myths?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Happily, though, there were forces greater than Herod or Satan at work. How so? Well, when the visitors reached Jesus’ house and saw him with his mother, they brought out gifts, asking for nothing in return. How strange it must have been for Joseph and Mary to find themselves suddenly in possession of “gold and frankincense and myrrh”<wbr />—valuable commodities! The astrologers intended to go back and tell King Herod just where they had found the child. However, Jehovah intervened. By means of a dream, he instructed the astrologers to return home by another route.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62"><strong><em>Matthew 2:1-12</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Shortly after the astrologers left, Joseph received this warning from Jehovah’s angel: “Get up, take the young child and its mother and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I give you word; for Herod is about to search for the young child to destroy it.” (<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Matt. 2:13</a>) So, as we noted at the outset, Joseph obeyed swiftly. He put his child’s safety above all else and took his family to Egypt. Because those pagan astrologers had brought such costly gifts, Joseph now had assets that might help the family during their sojourn ahead.</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Apocryphal myths and legends later romanticized the journey to Egypt, claiming that little Jesus miraculously shortened the trip, rendered bandits harmless, and even made date palms bend down to his mother to yield their fruit.<span id="footnotesource3"></span><a href="#footnote3">*</a> In truth, it was simply a long, arduous trek into the unknown.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p68">Joseph sacrificed his own comfort for the sake of his family</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"><strong>12. </strong>Parents who are raising children in this perilous world can learn what from Joseph?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Parents can learn a lot from Joseph. He readily set aside his work and sacrificed his own comfort in order to protect his family from danger. Clearly, he viewed his family as a sacred trust from Jehovah. Parents today raise their children in a perilous world, a world full of forces that would endanger, corrupt, or even destroy young ones. How admirable it is when mothers and fathers act decisively, as Joseph did, working hard to protect their children from such influences!</p>
<h2><strong>Joseph Provided for His Family</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>13, 14. </strong>How did Joseph and Mary end up raising their family in Nazareth?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>It seems that the family did not stay long in Egypt, for soon the angel informed Joseph that Herod was dead. Joseph brought his family back to their homeland. An ancient prophecy had foretold that Jehovah would call his Son “out of Egypt.” (<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Matt. 2:15</a>) Joseph helped to fulfill that prophecy, but where would he lead his family now?</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Joseph was cautious. He wisely feared Herod’s successor, Archelaus, who was likewise vicious and murderous. Divine guidance led Joseph to take his family up north, away from Jerusalem and all its intrigues, back to his hometown of Nazareth in Galilee. There he and Mary raised their family.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"><strong><em>Matthew 2:19-23</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>15, 16. </strong>What was Joseph’s work like, and what tools might he have used?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>They led a simple life<wbr />—but not an easy one. The Bible refers to Joseph as the carpenter, using a word that embraces many ways of working with wood, such as cutting down timber, hauling it, and seasoning it for use in building houses, boats, small bridges, carts, wheels, yokes, and all kinds of farm implements. (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Matt. 13:55</a>) It was hard physical work. A carpenter in Bible times often worked near the doorway of his modest house or in a shop adjacent to it.</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Joseph used a wide range of tools, some likely handed down from his father. He may have used a square, a plummet, a chalk line, a hatchet, a saw, an adze, a hammer, a mallet, chisels, a drill that he worked by pulling a bow back and forth, various glues, and perhaps some nails, though they were costly.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 2:13, 14)</strong> After they had departed, look! Jehovah’s* angel appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I give you word, for Herod is about to search for the young child to kill him.” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>So Joseph got up and by night took along the young child and the child’s mother and went into Egypt.</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 1:18-21)</strong> But this is how the birth of Jesus Christ took place. During the time his mother Mary was promised in marriage to Joseph, she was found to be pregnant by holy spirit* before they were united. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>However, because her husband Joseph was righteous and did not want to make her a public spectacle, he intended to divorce her secretly. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>But after he had thought these things over, look! Jehovah’s* angel appeared to him in a dream, saying: “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take your wife Mary home, for what has been conceived* in her is by holy spirit. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>She will give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus,* for he will save his people from their sins.”</p><p></p><p>Or “active force.”</p><p>This is the first of 237 places in the Christian Greek Scriptures where the divine name, Jehovah, occurs in the main text of this version. See App. A5.</p><p>Or “begotten.”</p><p>Corresponds to the Hebrew name Jeshua, or Joshua, which means “Jehovah Is Salvation.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 2:1-12)</strong> After Jesus had been born in Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa in the days of Herod* the king, look! astrologers* from the East came to Jerusalem, <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>saying: “Where is the one born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when we were in the East, and we have come to do obeisance* to him.” <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>At hearing this, King Herod was agitated, and all Jerusalem with him. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>On gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ* was to be born. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They said to him: “In Bethʹle·hem of Ju·deʹa, for this is how it has been written through the prophet: <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>‘And you, O Bethʹle·hem of the land of Judah, are by no means the most insignificant city among the governors of Judah, for out of you will come a governing one, who will shepherd my people Israel.’” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then Herod secretly summoned the astrologers and carefully ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearing. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>When sending them to Bethʹle·hem, he said: “Go make a careful search for the young child, and when you have found him, report back to me so that I too may go and do obeisance to him.” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>After they had heard the king, they went their way, and look! the star they had seen when they were in the East went ahead of them until it came to a stop above where the young child was. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>On seeing the star, they rejoiced with great joy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And when they went into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and falling down, they did obeisance* to him. They also opened their treasures and presented him with gifts—gold and frankincense and myrrh. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>However, because they were given divine warning in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their country by another way.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “magi.”</p><p>Or “to bow down.”</p><p>Or “the Messiah; the Anointed One.”</p><p>Or “bowed down.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 2:13)</strong> After they had departed, look! Jehovah’s* angel appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I give you word, for Herod is about to search for the young child to kill him.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 2:15)</strong> He stayed there until the death of Herod. This fulfilled what was spoken by Jehovah* through his prophet, saying: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 2:19-23)</strong> When Herod had died, look! Jehovah’s* angel appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>and said: “Get up, take the young child and his mother and go into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the life* of the young child are dead.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So he got up and took the young child and the child’s mother and entered into the land of Israel. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>But hearing that Ar·che·laʹus ruled Ju·deʹa instead of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Moreover, being given divine warning in a dream, he withdrew into the territory of Galʹi·lee. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>And he came and settled in a city named Nazʹa·reth, in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Naz·a·reneʹ.”*</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Probably from the Hebrew expression “sprout.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 13:55)</strong> Is this not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> In those days, engagement was viewed in almost the same light as marriage.</p></div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> This “star” was no natural astronomical phenomenon; nor was it sent by God. Clearly, Satan used that supernatural manifestation as part of his wicked design to destroy Jesus.</p></div>
<div id="footnote3"><p><a href="#footnotesource3">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> The Bible clearly shows that Jesus’ first miracle, “the beginning of his signs,” did not occur until after his baptism.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">John 2:1-11</a>.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(John 2:1-11)</strong></a> And on the third day a marriage feast took place in Caʹna of Galʹi·lee, and the mother of Jesus was there. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the marriage feast. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the wine ran short, the mother of Jesus said to him: “They have no wine.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But Jesus said to her: “Woman, why is that of concern to me and to you?* My hour has not yet come.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>His mother said to those serving: “Do whatever he tells you.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Now there were six stone water jars sitting there as required by the purification rules of the Jews, each able to hold two or three liquid measures.* <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jesus said to them: “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled them to the brim. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then he said to them: “Now draw some out and take it to the director of the feast.” So they took it. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When the director of the feast tasted the water that had now been turned into wine, not knowing where it came from (although the servants who had drawn out the water knew), the director of the feast called the bridegroom <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>and said to him: “Everyone else puts out the fine wine first, and when people are intoxicated, the inferior. You have saved the fine wine until now.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jesus did this in Caʹna of Galʹi·lee as the beginning of his signs, and he made his glory manifest, and his disciples put their faith in him.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “What to me and to you, woman?” This is an idiom indicating objection. The use of “woman” does not denote disrespect.</p><p>Likely the liquid measure was the bath that equaled 22 L (5.81 gal). See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016241.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***sn song 88 Children Are a Trust From God***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 88</p>
<h1><strong>Children Are a Trust From God</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Psalm 127:3-5</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. When a man becomes a father</p>
<p class="p5">And a woman has a child of her own,</p>
<p class="p6">They share a trust, they must remember,</p>
<p class="p7">That is not theirs, not theirs alone.</p>
<p class="p8">The gift they share is from Jehovah;</p>
<p class="p9">Of life and love he is the one true Source.</p>
<p class="p10">To parents he gives sure direction</p>
<p class="p11">That they may follow the wisest course.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">A sacred trust you have been given;</p>
<p class="p14">A precious life is in your hands.</p>
<p class="p15">You can bestow the greatest favor;</p>
<p class="p16">Instruct your child in God’s commands.</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. All the words God has commanded<wbr />—</p>
<p class="p18">They must always prove to be on your heart.</p>
<p class="p19">These words you’ll speak to sons and daughters;</p>
<p class="p20">This is your trust, this is your part.</p>
<p class="p21">To them you’ll speak along your roadway,</p>
<p class="p22">When you rise up and when you are at rest.</p>
<p class="p23">In years to come, may they remember,</p>
<p class="p24">May they be faithful, may they be blessed.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p25">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p26">A sacred trust you have been given;</p>
<p class="p27">A precious life is in your hands.</p>
<p class="p28">You can bestow the greatest favor;</p>
<p class="p29">Instruct your child in God’s commands.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p30">(See also <span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Deut. 6:6, 7;</a><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"> Eph. 6:4;</a><span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71"> 1 Tim. 4:16</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Ps. 127:3-5)</strong></a> Look! Sons* are an inheritance from Jehovah; The fruit of the womb is a reward.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man, So are the sons of one’s youth.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who fills his quiver with them. They will not be put to shame, For they will speak with enemies in the city gate.</p><p></p><p>Or “Children.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Deut. 6:6, 7)</strong></a> These words that I am commanding you today must be on your heart, <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and you must inculcate them in* your sons and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.</p><p></p><p>Or “repeat them to; impress them upon.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(Eph. 6:4)</strong></a> And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition* of Jehovah.*</p><p></p><p>Or “instruction; guidance.” Lit., “putting mind in.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 4:16)</strong></a> Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
