<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 July 25-31</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016250.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 79:0-86:17)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>79 </strong>O God, the nations have invaded your inheritance; They have defiled your holy temple; They have turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the heavens And the flesh of your loyal ones to the wild beasts of the earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They have poured out their blood like water around Jerusalem, And no one is left to bury them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have become an object of reproach to our neighbors; Those around us ridicule and jeer us.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>How long, O Jehovah, will you be furious? Forever? How long will your indignation burn just like fire?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know you And on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For they have devoured Jacob And have desolated his homeland.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not hold us accountable for the errors of our ancestors. Quickly show us your mercy, For we have been brought very low.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Help us, O God of our salvation, For the sake of your glorious name; Rescue us and forgive* our sins for the sake of your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?” Before our eyes may it become known among the nations That the shed blood of your servants has been avenged. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May you hear the sighing of the prisoner. Use your great power* to preserve* those sentenced to death.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Repay our neighbors sevenfold For the taunts they have leveled at you, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Then we, your people and the flock of your pasture, Will give thanks to you forever; And we will declare your praise from generation to generation. </p><p>To the director; set to “The Lilies.” A reminder. Of Aʹsaph. A melody. <strong>80 </strong>O Shepherd of Israel, listen, You who are guiding Joseph just like a flock. You who sit enthroned above* the cherubs, Shine forth.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before Eʹphra·im and Benjamin and Ma·nasʹseh, Do stir up your mightiness; Come and save us.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>O God, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah God of armies, how long will you be hostile toward* the prayer of your people?  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You feed them tears as their bread, And you make them drink tears beyond measure.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You let our neighbors quarrel over us; Our enemies keep mocking us as they please.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You made a vine depart from Egypt. You drove out the nations and planted it.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You cleared a space for it, And it took root and filled the land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The mountains were covered by its shadow, And the cedars of God by its branches. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Its branches reached as far as the sea, And its shoots to the River.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Why have you broken down the stone walls of the vineyard, So that all those passing by pluck its fruit? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The boars of the forest ravage it, And the wild animals of the field feed on it. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God of armies, please return. Look down from heaven and see! Take care of this vine, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The stock* that your right hand has planted, And look upon the son whom* you made strong for yourself. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>It is burned with fire, cut down. They perish at your rebuke.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May your hand give support to the man at your right hand, To the son of man you have made strong for yourself. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Then we will not turn away from you. Preserve us alive, so that we may call on your name. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved. </p><p>To the director; upon the Gitʹtith.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>81 </strong>Shout joyfully to God our strength. Shout in triumph to the God of Jacob.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Begin the music and take a tambourine, The melodious harp together with the stringed instrument.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Blow the horn on the new moon, On the full moon, for the day of our festival.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For it is a decree for Israel, A ruling of the God of Jacob.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established it as a reminder for Joseph When He went out against the land of Egypt. I heard a voice* that I did not recognize:  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“I lifted the burden from his shoulder; His hands were freed from the basket.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In your distress you called, and I rescued you; I answered you from the thundercloud.* I tested you at the waters of Merʹi·bah.* (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Hear, my people, and I will testify against you. O Israel, if you would only listen to me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Among you, there will be no strange god, And you will not bow down to a foreign god. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>I, Jehovah, am your God, The one who brought you out of the land of Egypt. Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But my people did not listen to my voice; Israel would not submit to me. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So I let them follow their stubborn hearts; They did what they thought was right.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>If only my people would listen to me, If only Israel would walk in my ways! <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Their enemies I would quickly subdue; I would turn my hand against their adversaries. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Those who hate Jehovah will cringe in his presence, And their outcome* will be forever. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But he will feed you* with the finest* wheat And satisfy you with honey from the rock.” </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>82 </strong>God takes his place in the divine assembly;* In the middle of the gods* he judges:  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“How long will you continue to judge with injustice And show partiality to the wicked? (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Defend* the lowly and the fatherless. Render justice to the helpless and destitute.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Rescue the lowly and the poor; Save them out of the hand of the wicked.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They do not know, nor do they understand; They are walking about in darkness; All the foundations of the earth are being shaken.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“I have said, ‘You are gods,* All of you are sons of the Most High.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But you will die just as men do; And like any other prince you will fall!’”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O God, and judge the earth, For all the nations belong to you. </p><p>A song. A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>83 </strong>O God, do not be silent; Do not keep quiet* or still, O Divine One.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For look! your enemies are in an uproar; Those who hate you act arrogantly.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>With cunning they secretly plot against your people; They conspire against your treasured ones.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They devise a unified strategy;* They have made an alliance* against you—  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek, Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>As·syrʹi·a too has joined them; They give support to* the sons of Lot. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an, As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream* of Kiʹshon. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They were annihilated at En-dor; They became manure for the ground. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make their nobles like Oʹreb and Zeʹeb And their princes* like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O my God, make them like a whirling thistle,* Like stubble blown about by the wind. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like a fire that burns up the forest, Like a flame that scorches the mountains, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>So may you pursue them with your tempest And terrify them with your windstorm. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Cover* their faces with dishonor, So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May they be put to shame and be terrified forever; May they be disgraced and perish; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth. </p><p>For the director; upon the Gitʹtith.* Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. <strong>84 </strong>How lovely* your grand tabernacle is, O Jehovah of armies!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My whole being* yearns, Yes, I am faint with longing, For the courtyards of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh shout joyfully to the living God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Even the bird finds a home there And the swallow a nest for herself, Where she cares for her young Near your grand altar, O Jehovah of armies, My King and my God!  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Happy are those dwelling in your house! They continue to praise you. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy are the men who find their strength in you, Whose hearts are set on the highways.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>When they pass through the Baʹca Valley,* They make it into a place of springs; And the early rain clothes it* with blessings.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will walk on from strength to strength; Each one appears before God in Zion.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, hear my prayer; Listen, O God of Jacob. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Look, our shield and our God,* Look upon the face of your anointed one. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else! I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my God Rather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield; He gives favor and glory. Jehovah will not hold back anything good From those walking in integrity. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>O Jehovah of armies, Happy is the man who trusts in you. </p><p>For the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. <strong>85 </strong>You have shown favor, O Jehovah, to your land; You brought back those of Jacob who were taken captive.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You have pardoned the error of your people; You forgave* all their sin. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You held back all your fury; You turned away from your hot anger.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Restore us,* O God of our salvation, And set aside your displeasure with us.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Will you be furious with us forever? Will you prolong your anger to generation after generation?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Will you not revive us again So that your people may rejoice in you?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to us, O Jehovah, And grant us your salvation.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says, For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones, But let them not return to overconfidence.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him, So that his glory may reside in our land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together; Righteousness and peace will kiss each other. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Faithfulness will sprout from the earth, And righteousness will look down from the heavens. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, Jehovah will give what is good,* And our land will yield its harvest. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteousness will walk before him And make a path for his footsteps. </p><p>A prayer of David. <strong>86 </strong>Incline your ear,* O Jehovah, and answer me, For I am afflicted and poor.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Guard my life,* for I am loyal. Save your servant who is trusting in you, For you are my God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Make your servant* rejoice, For to you, O Jehovah, I turn.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer; And pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I call on you in the day of my distress, For you will answer me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah, There are no works like yours.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>All the nations that you made Will come and bow down before you, O Jehovah, And they will give glory to your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you are great and do wondrous things; You are God, you alone. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart* to fear your name. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart, And I will glorify your name forever, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For your loyal love toward me is great, And you have saved my life* from the depths of the Grave.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God, presumptuous men rise up against me; A band of ruthless men seek to take my life,* And they have no regard for you.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant, And save the son of your slave girl. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Show me a sign* of your goodness, So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame. For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or possibly, “set free.”</p><p>Lit., “the sons of death.”</p><p>Or possibly, “between.”</p><p>Or “Reveal your radiance.”</p><p>Lit., “fume against.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “main stem of the vine.”</p><p>Or “branch that.”</p><p>Lit., “the rebuke of your face.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “language.”</p><p>Lit., “in the hidden place of thunder.”</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Lit., “They walked in their counsels.”</p><p>Lit., “time.”</p><p>Lit., “him,” that is, God’s people.</p><p>Lit., “the fat of.”</p><p>Or “in the assembly of the Divine One.”</p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p><p>Or “Judge.”</p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p><p>Or “keep speechless.”</p><p>Or “raise their heads.”</p><p>Lit., “concealed ones.”</p><p>Lit., “They consult with a heart together.”</p><p>Or “a covenant.”</p><p>Lit., “have become an arm to.”</p><p>Or “wadi.”</p><p>Or “leaders.”</p><p>Or “like tumbleweed.”</p><p>Lit., “Fill.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “deeply loved.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Or “the valley of baca bushes.”</p><p>Or possibly, “And the instructor enwraps himself.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Look at our shield, O God.”</p><p>Lit., “covered.”</p><p>Or “Gather us back.”</p><p>Or “prosperity.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “the soul of your servant.”</p><p>Or “I raise my soul.”</p><p>Or “Give me an undivided heart.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “seek my soul.”</p><p>Or “have not set you in front of themselves.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “and truth.”</p><p>Or “evidence.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016250.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Pss. 85:8-86:17)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says, For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones, But let them not return to overconfidence.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him, So that his glory may reside in our land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together; Righteousness and peace will kiss each other. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Faithfulness will sprout from the earth, And righteousness will look down from the heavens. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, Jehovah will give what is good,* And our land will yield its harvest. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteousness will walk before him And make a path for his footsteps. </p><p>A prayer of David. <strong>86 </strong>Incline your ear,* O Jehovah, and answer me, For I am afflicted and poor.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Guard my life,* for I am loyal. Save your servant who is trusting in you, For you are my God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Make your servant* rejoice, For to you, O Jehovah, I turn.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer; And pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I call on you in the day of my distress, For you will answer me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah, There are no works like yours.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>All the nations that you made Will come and bow down before you, O Jehovah, And they will give glory to your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you are great and do wondrous things; You are God, you alone. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart* to fear your name. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart, And I will glorify your name forever, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For your loyal love toward me is great, And you have saved my life* from the depths of the Grave.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God, presumptuous men rise up against me; A band of ruthless men seek to take my life,* And they have no regard for you.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant, And save the son of your slave girl. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Show me a sign* of your goodness, So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame. For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.</p><p></p><p>Or “prosperity.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “the soul of your servant.”</p><p>Or “I raise my soul.”</p><p>Or “Give me an undivided heart.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “seek my soul.”</p><p>Or “have not set you in front of themselves.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “and truth.”</p><p>Or “evidence.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***snnw song 138 Jehovah Is Your Name***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 138</p>
<h1><strong>Jehovah Is Your Name</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">           Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">           Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">Psalm 83:18</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             The living and true God—</p>
<p class="p8">The God of all creation</p>
<p class="p9">In ev’ry generation—</p>
<p class="p10">Jehovah is your name.</p>
<p class="p11">We’re honored and we’re proud</p>
<p class="p12">To be your congregation.</p>
<p class="p13">In ev’ry tribe and nation,</p>
<p class="p14">Your glory we proclaim.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p15">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p16">Jehovah, Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p17">There is no God like you.</p>
<p class="p18">There’s no other in the heavens</p>
<p class="p19">Or on the earth below.</p>
<p class="p20">You alone are God Almighty,</p>
<p class="p21">And this all men must know.</p>
<p class="p22">Jehovah, Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p23">We have no other God but you.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p24">             You cause us to become</p>
<p class="p25">Whatever you desire,</p>
<p class="p26">To do as you require—</p>
<p class="p27">Jehovah is your name.</p>
<p class="p28">And Witnesses for you</p>
<p class="p29">Is what you’ve kindly named us.</p>
<p class="p30">We’re honored you have claimed us—</p>
<p class="p31">A people for your name.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p32">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p33">Jehovah, Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p34">There is no God like you.</p>
<p class="p35">There’s no other in the heavens</p>
<p class="p36">Or on the earth below.</p>
<p class="p37">You alone are God Almighty,</p>
<p class="p38">And this all men must know.</p>
<p class="p39">Jehovah, Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p40">We have no other God but you.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p41">(See also <span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">2 Chron. 6:14;</a><span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10"> Ps. 72:19;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> Isa. 42:8</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Ps. 83:18)</strong></a> May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(2 Chron. 6:14)</strong></a> and he said: “O Jehovah the God of Israel, there is no God like you in the heavens or on the earth, keeping the covenant and showing loyal love to your servants who are walking before you with all their heart.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:19)</strong></a> May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Isa. 42:8)</strong></a> I am Jehovah. That is my name; I give my glory to no one else,* Nor my praise to graven images.</p><p></p><p>Or “I do not share my glory with anyone else.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w08 10/15 p. 13 Jehovah’s Answer to a Heartfelt Prayer***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p11"><sup>7 </sup>What was the psalmist’s foremost concern? Of course, he must have been very worried about his own personal safety and that of his family. Yet, the subject of his prayer was the reproach being brought on Jehovah’s name and the threats against the nation that bore that name. May we all keep a similar, balanced viewpoint as we endure the difficult final days of this old world.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"><em>Matthew 6:9, 10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="qu"> 8. What was the objective of the nations in conspiring against Israel?</p>
<p class="p12"><sup>8 </sup>The psalmist quotes Israel’s enemies as saying: “Come and let us efface them from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.” (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Ps. 83:4</a>) What hatred those nations had for God’s chosen people! But they had another motive for their conspiracy. They coveted Israel’s land and boasted: “Let us take possession of the abiding places of God for ourselves.” (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Ps. 83:12</a>) Has something similar been true in our day? Yes!</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:9, 10)</strong> “You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “be held sacred; be treated as holy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:4)</strong> They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:12)</strong> For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w08 10/15 p. 15 Jehovah’s Answer to a Heartfelt Prayer***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p22"><strong>Pray for Jehovah’s Vindication</strong></p>
<p class="qu">16. How have the faces of opposers been ‘filled with dishonor’ today?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>16 </sup>Throughout these “last days,” Jehovah has thwarted all efforts to eliminate his people. (<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">2 Tim. 3:1</a>) As a result, opposers have been shamed. <span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Psalm 83:16</a> foreshadowed this when it said: “Fill their faces with dishonor, that people may search for your name, O Jehovah.” In country after country, opponents have failed miserably in their effort to silence Jehovah’s Witnesses. In those lands, the steadfastness and endurance of worshippers of the one true God have served as a witness to righthearted ones, and many have ‘searched for Jehovah’s name.’ In a number of lands where Jehovah’s Witnesses were once viciously persecuted, there are now tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands, of happy praisers of Jehovah. What a triumph for Jehovah! And how embarrassing for his enemies!<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17"><em>Jeremiah 1:19</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:1)</strong> But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:16)</strong> Cover* their faces with dishonor, So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “Fill.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Jer. 1:19)</strong> And they will certainly fight against you, But they will not prevail against you,* For ‘I am with you,’ declares Jehovah, ‘to save you.’”</p><p></p><p>Or “defeat you.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w11 5/15 p. 16 Who Is the Most Important Person in Your Life?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">1, 2. With regard to our personal salvation, why is it not enough just to know Jehovah’s name?</p>
<p class="p3">PERHAPS the first time you saw Jehovah’s name was when it was shown to you at <span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Psalm 83:18</a>. You may have been surprised to read those words: “That people may know that you, whose name is Jehovah, you alone are the Most High over all the earth.” Since then, you no doubt have used this same scripture to help others come to know our loving God, Jehovah.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Rom. 10:12, 13</a>.</p>
<p class="p4"><sup>2 </sup>Although it is important for people to know Jehovah’s name, such knowledge in itself is not enough. Notice how the psalmist highlights yet another truth essential to our salvation when he says: “You alone are the Most High over all the earth.” Yes, Jehovah is the most important Person in the whole universe. As the Creator of all things, he has the right to expect full submission from all his creatures. (<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Rev. 4:11</a>) For good reason, then, we need to ask ourselves, ‘Who is the most important person in <em>my </em>life?’ It is vital that we carefully analyze our answer to that question!</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:18)</strong> May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 10:12, 13)</strong> For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek. There is the same Lord over all, who is rich* toward all those calling on him. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah* will be saved.”</p><p></p><p>Or “generous.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w08 10/15 pp. 15-16 Jehovah’s Answer to a Heartfelt Prayer***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">17. What critical situation faces mankind, and what words will we soon remember?</p>
<p class="p24"><sup>17 </sup>We know, of course, that the battle is not over. And we continue to preach the good news<wbr />—even to opposers. (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Matt. 24:14,</a><span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22"> 21</a>) However, the opportunity now open to such opposers to repent and gain salvation will soon come to an end. The sanctification of Jehovah’s name is far more important than human salvation. (<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23"><em>Ezekiel 38:23</em></a><em>.</em>) When the nations combine in the foretold earth-wide effort to destroy God’s people, we will remember these words of the psalmist’s prayer: “O may they be ashamed and be disturbed for all times, and may they become abashed and perish.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Ps. 83:17</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">18, 19. (a) What awaits determined opposers of Jehovah’s sovereignty? (b) How does the approaching final vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty affect you?</p>
<p class="p25"><sup>18 </sup>A humiliating end awaits determined opposers of Jehovah’s sovereignty. God’s Word reveals that those who “do not obey the good news”<wbr />—and for this reason are executed at Armageddon—<wbr />will suffer “everlasting destruction.” (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">2 Thess. 1:7-9</a>) Their destruction and the survival of those who worship Jehovah in truth will be convincing evidence that Jehovah is the only true God. In the new world, that great victory will not be forgotten. Those who come back in the “resurrection of . . . the righteous and the unrighteous” will learn of Jehovah’s great act. (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Acts 24:15</a>) In the new world, they will see convincing evidence of the wisdom of living under Jehovah’s sovereignty. And meek ones among them will quickly be convinced that Jehovah is the only true God.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:21)</strong> for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Ezek. 38:23)</strong> And I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:17)</strong> May they be put to shame and be terrified forever; May they be disgraced and perish;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(2 Thess. 1:7-9)</strong> But you who suffer tribulation will be given relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance on those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Acts 24:15)</strong> And I have hope toward God, which hope these men also look forward to, that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w06 7/15 p. 12 par. 5 Highlights From Books Three and Four of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p23"><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"><strong>79:9</strong></a><strong>. </strong>Jehovah listens to our prayers, especially when they are concerning the sanctification of his name.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 79:9)</strong> Help us, O God of our salvation, For the sake of your glorious name; Rescue us and forgive* our sins for the sake of your name.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w06 7/15 p. 12 par. 9 Highlights From Books Three and Four of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p27"><span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28"><strong>86:5</strong></a><strong>. </strong>How grateful we can be that Jehovah is “ready to forgive”! He is on the lookout for any evidence that would provide a basis for him to show mercy to a repentant wrongdoer.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 86:5)</strong> For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***fg lesson 7***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">The Kingdom of God is a heavenly government. It will replace all other governments and will cause God’s will to be done in heaven and on earth. The news about God’s Kingdom is good. Soon God’s Kingdom will satisfy man’s need for good government. It will unite everyone living on earth.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29"><em>Daniel 2:44;</em></a><span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30"> <em>Matthew 6:9, 10;</em></a><span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31"> <em>24:14</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:9, 10)</strong> “You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also on earth.</p><p></p><p>Or “be held sacred; be treated as holy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***fg lesson 7***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p7">God’s Son is the ideal King because he is kind and he is firm for what is right. (<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">John 1:14</a>) Also, he is powerful enough to help people because he will rule over the earth from heaven. After he was resurrected, he ascended to heaven and sat down to wait at Jehovah’s right hand. (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Hebrews 10:12, 13</a>) Finally, God gave him power to begin ruling.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34"><em>Daniel 7:13, 14</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(John 1:14)</strong> So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father; and he was full of divine favor* and truth.</p><p></p><p>Or “of undeserved kindness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:12, 13)</strong> But this man offered one sacrifice for sins for all time and sat down at the right hand of God, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>from then on waiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 7:13, 14)</strong> “I kept watching in the visions of the night, and look! with the clouds of the heavens, someone like a son of man was coming; and he gained access to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him up close before that One. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And to him there were given rulership, honor, and a kingdom, that the peoples, nations, and language groups should all serve him. His rulership is an everlasting rulership that will not pass away, and his kingdom will not be destroyed.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***fg lesson 7***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p14">By means of a global preaching work, God’s Kingdom is already uniting a great crowd of people from all nations. Millions of meek people are becoming subjects of Jesus. God’s Kingdom will protect them when it destroys the present wicked system of things on earth. So all who want to benefit from God’s Kingdom should learn to be obedient subjects of Jesus.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35"><em>Revelation 7:9,</em></a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> <em>14,</em></a><span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37"> <em>16, 17</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p15">During a period of 1,000 years, the Kingdom will accomplish God’s original purpose for mankind. The earth will become a global paradise. Finally, Jesus will hand the Kingdom back to his Father. (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">1 Corinthians 15:24-26</a>) Do you know someone whom you would like to tell about God’s Kingdom?<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39"><em>Psalm 37:10, 11,</em></a><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"> <em>29</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 7:9)</strong> After this I saw, and look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues,* standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes; and there were palm branches in their hands.</p><p></p><p>Or “languages.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 7:14)</strong> So right away I said to him: “My lord, you are the one who knows.” And he said to me: “These are the ones who come out of the great tribulation, and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 7:16, 17)</strong> They will hunger no more nor thirst anymore, neither will the sun beat down on them nor any scorching heat, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>because the Lamb, who is in the midst* of the throne, will shepherd them and will guide them to springs* of waters of life. And God will wipe out every tear from their eyes.”</p><p></p><p>Or “at the center.”</p><p>Or “fountains.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 15:24-26)</strong> Next, the end, when he hands over the Kingdom to his God and Father, when he has brought to nothing all government and all authority and power. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>For he must rule as king until God has put all enemies under his feet. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>And the last enemy, death, is to be brought to nothing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 37:10, 11)</strong> Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more; You will look at where they were, And they will not be there. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the meek will possess the earth, And they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 37:29)</strong> The righteous will possess the earth, And they will live forever on it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***sn song 111 He Will Call***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 111</p>
<h1><strong>He Will Call</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Job 14:13-15</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Life, like a mist, appears for just a day,</p>
<p class="p5">Then disappears tomorrow.</p>
<p class="p6">All that we are can quickly fade away,</p>
<p class="p7">Replaced with tears and sorrow.</p>
<p class="p8">If a man should die, can he live again?</p>
<p class="p9">Hear the promise God has made:</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p10">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p11">He will call; The dead will answer.</p>
<p class="p12">They shall live at his command.</p>
<p class="p13">For he will have a longing</p>
<p class="p14">For the work of his own hand.</p>
<p class="p15">So have faith, and do not wonder,</p>
<p class="p16">For our God can make us stand.</p>
<p class="p17">And we shall live forever,</p>
<p class="p18">As the work of his own hand.</p>
</div>
<p class="p19">2. Friends of our God, though they may pass away,</p>
<p class="p20">Will never be forsaken.</p>
<p class="p21">All those asleep who in God’s mem’ry stay,</p>
<p class="p22">From death he will awaken.</p>
<p class="p23">Then we’ll come to see all that life can be:</p>
<p class="p24">Paradise eternally.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p25">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p26">He will call; The dead will answer.</p>
<p class="p27">They shall live at his command.</p>
<p class="p28">For he will have a longing</p>
<p class="p29">For the work of his own hand.</p>
<p class="p30">So have faith, and do not wonder,</p>
<p class="p31">For our God can make us stand.</p>
<p class="p32">And we shall live forever,</p>
<p class="p33">As the work of his own hand.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p34">(See also <span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">John 6:40;</a><span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43"> 11:11,</a><span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44"> 43;</a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> Jas. 4:14</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Job 14:13-15)</strong></a> O that in the Grave* you would conceal me, That you would hide me until your anger passes by, That you would set a time limit for me and remember me! <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>If a man dies, can he live again? I will wait all the days of my compulsory service Until my relief comes. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>You will call, and I will answer you. You will long* for the work of your hands.</p><p></p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “yearn.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(John 6:40)</strong></a> For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who recognizes the Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life, and I will resurrect him on the last day.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(John 11:11)</strong></a> After he said these things, he added: “Lazʹa·rus our friend has fallen asleep, but I am traveling there to awaken him.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(John 11:43)</strong></a> When he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice: “Lazʹa·rus, come out!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Jas. 4:14)</strong></a> whereas you do not know what your life will be like tomorrow. For you are a mist that appears for a little while and then disappears.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***fg pp. 4-5***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl"><strong>LESSON 2</strong></p>
<h1><strong>Who Is God?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>1. Why should we worship God?</strong></h2>
<p class="p4">The true God is the Creator of all things. He had no beginning and will never have an end. (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Psalm 90:2</a>) He is the Source of the good news found in the Bible. (<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">1 Timothy 1:11</a>) Since God gave us life, we should worship only him.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"><em>Revelation 4:11</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<h2><strong>2. What is God like?</strong></h2>
<p class="p6">No human has ever seen God because he is a Spirit, which means that he is a higher form of life than the physical creatures who live on earth. (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">John 1:18;</a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> 4:24</a>) Nevertheless, we can discern God’s personality from the things he has made. For instance, the variety of fruits and flowers tells us of his love and wisdom. The size of the universe tells us of his power.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51"><em>Romans 1:20</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p7">We can learn even more about God’s personality by reading the Bible. For example, it tells us what God likes and what he does not like, how he treats people, and how he reacts in different situations.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52"><em>Psalm 103:7-10</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<h2><strong>3. Does God have a name?</strong></h2>
<p class="p9">Jesus said: “Our Father in the heavens, let your <em>name </em>be sanctified.” (<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Matthew 6:9</a>) Although God has many titles, he has only one name. In each language, it is pronounced differently. In English it is usually pronounced “Jehovah.” But some people pronounce it “Yahweh.”<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"><em>Psalm 83:18</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p10">God’s name has been taken out of many Bibles and replaced with the titles Lord or God. But when the Bible was written, it contained God’s name some 7,000 times. Jesus made God’s name known when he taught people about God.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55"><em>John 17:26</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<h2><strong>4. Does Jehovah care about us?</strong></h2>
<p class="p12">Does widespread suffering mean that Jehovah is a God who does not care about us? Some people claim that he makes us suffer to test us, but this is not true.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56"><em>James 1:13</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p13">God has granted man the dignity of free will. Do we not appreciate our freedom to choose to serve God? (<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Joshua 24:15</a>) But many choose to do bad things to others, so suffering abounds. It saddens Jehovah to see such injustice.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58"><em>Genesis 6:5, 6</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p14">Jehovah is a God who cares about us. He wants us to enjoy life. Soon he will eliminate suffering and those who cause it. Meanwhile, he has good reason to allow suffering for a limited time. In Lesson 8, we will learn what that reason is.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"><em>2 Peter 2:9;</em></a><span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60"> <em>3:7,</em></a><span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61"> <em>13</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<h2><strong>5. How can we draw closer to God?</strong></h2>
<p class="p16">Jehovah invites us to draw close to him by speaking to him in prayer. He is interested in us individually. (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Psalm 65:2;</a><span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63"> 145:18</a>) He is willing to forgive. He recognizes our efforts to please him, even if we sometimes fail. So despite our imperfection, we really can enjoy a close relationship with God.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"><em>Psalm 103:12-14;</em></a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> <em>James 4:8</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p17">Since Jehovah has given us life, we should love him more than we love anyone else. (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Mark 12:30</a>) As you express your love for God by learning more about him and doing as he asks, you will draw ever closer to him.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67"><em>1 Timothy 2:4;</em></a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> <em>1 John 5:3</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 90:2)</strong> Before the mountains were born Or you brought forth* the earth and the productive land, From everlasting to everlasting,* you are God.</p><p></p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 1:11)</strong> according to the glorious good news of the happy God, with which I was entrusted.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(John 1:18)</strong> No man has seen God at any time; the only-begotten god who is at the Father’s side* is the one who has explained Him.</p><p></p><p>Or “in the bosom position with the Father.” This refers to a position of special favor.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(John 4:24)</strong> God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:20)</strong> For his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:7-10)</strong> He made known his ways to Moses, His deeds to the sons of Israel.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve.</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:9)</strong> “You must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.*</p><p></p><p>Or “be held sacred; be treated as holy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:18)</strong> May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 17:26)</strong> I have made your name known to them and will make it known, so that the love with which you loved me may be in them and I in union with them.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 1:13)</strong> When under trial, let no one say: “I am being tried by God.” For with evil things God cannot be tried, nor does he himself try anyone.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 24:15)</strong> Now if it seems bad to you to serve Jehovah, choose for yourselves today whom you will serve, whether the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the River* or the gods of the Amʹor·ites in whose land you are dwelling. But as for me and my household, we will serve Jehovah.”</p><p></p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 6:5, 6)</strong> Consequently, Jehovah saw that man’s wickedness was great on the earth and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah regretted* that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened.*</p><p></p><p>Or “was grieved.”</p><p>Or “and he felt hurt at his heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 2:9)</strong> So, then, Jehovah* knows how to rescue people of godly devotion out of trial, but to reserve unrighteous people to be destroyed* on the day of judgment,</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Lit., “cut off.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 3:7)</strong> But by the same word the heavens and the earth that now exist are reserved for fire and are being kept until the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly people.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 3:13)</strong> But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 65:2)</strong> O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 145:18)</strong> Jehovah is near to all those calling on him, To all who call on him in truth.*</p><p></p><p>Or “in sincerity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 103:12-14)</strong> As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, So far off from us he has put our transgressions. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those who fear him. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For he well knows how we are formed, Remembering that we are dust.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Jas. 4:8)</strong> Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Mark 12:30)</strong> and you must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 2:4)</strong> whose will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(1 John 5:3)</strong> For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments; and yet his commandments are not burdensome,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***ia pp. 176-179 “I Have Believed”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>A Beloved Brother Lost<wbr />—And Restored</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>14. </strong>Why can we be sure that Martha set a good example in accepting correction?</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Did Martha accept Jesus’ gentle reproof and learn from it? We need not wonder. The apostle John, in introducing a thrilling account about Martha’s brother, reminds us: “Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.” (<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">John 11:5</a>) Months had passed since Jesus’ visit to Bethany described above. Clearly, Martha had not indulged in sulking; she was not nursing a grudge against Jesus for his loving counsel. She had taken it to heart. In this matter too, she set an excellent example of faith for us, for who of us does not need a little correction at times?</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>15, 16. </strong>(a) How did Martha surely respond when her brother took ill? (b) Why were Martha’s and Mary’s hopes dashed?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When her brother took ill, Martha surely busied herself with his care. She did everything in her power to soothe his discomfort and help him get better. Nonetheless, Lazarus sank still deeper into his illness. Hour after hour, his sisters stayed by his side to care for him. How often Martha must have gazed into her brother’s haggard face, remembering their many years together and the joys and sorrows they had shared!</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When it looked as if Lazarus was beyond their help, Martha and Mary sent a message to Jesus. He was preaching some two days’ journey away. Their message was simple: “Lord, see! the one for whom you have affection is sick.” (<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">John 11:1,</a><span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71"> 3</a>) They knew that Jesus loved their brother, and they had faith that he would do whatever he could to help his friend. Did they cling to the hope that Jesus might arrive before it was too late? If so, their hopes were dashed. Lazarus died.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>17. </strong>What puzzled Martha, and how did she react when she heard that Jesus was nearing the town?</p>
<p class="p21"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Together, Martha and Mary mourned their brother, taking care of the preparations for his burial and receiving the many guests from Bethany and its environs. Still, no news of Jesus. Martha may have grown more puzzled as the time passed. Finally, four days after Lazarus’ death, Martha heard that Jesus was nearing the town. Ever the woman of action, even in this grim hour, Martha got up and, without telling Mary, rushed out to meet Jesus.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"><strong><em>John 11:18-20</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>18, 19. </strong>Martha expressed what hope, and why was her faith remarkable?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>When Martha caught sight of her Master, she put into words the thought that had been tormenting her and Mary for days: “Lord, if you had been here my brother would not have died.” But hope and faith were not dead in Martha. She added: “And yet at present I know that as many things as you ask God for, God will give you.” Jesus immediately said something to strengthen her faith: “Your brother will rise.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">John 11:21-23</a>.</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Martha thought that Jesus was talking about the future resurrection, so she replied: “I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.” (<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">John 11:24</a>) Her faith in that teaching was remarkable. Some Jewish religious leaders, called Sadducees, denied that there would be a resurrection, though it was a clear teaching in the inspired Scriptures. (<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Dan. 12:13;</a><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"> Mark 12:18</a>) Martha knew, however, that Jesus taught the resurrection hope and had even performed resurrections<wbr />—although not of anyone who had been dead as long as Lazarus had. She did not know what lay ahead.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20. </strong>Explain the meaning of Jesus’ unforgettable statement recorded at <span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">John 11:25-27</a> and of Martha’s reply.</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Jesus then made an unforgettable statement: “I am the resurrection and the life.” Indeed, Jehovah God has given his Son the authority to perform resurrections on a global scale in the future. Jesus asked Martha: “Do you believe this?” Then she gave the answer discussed at the outset of this chapter. She had faith that Jesus was the Christ, or Messiah, that he was the Son of Jehovah God, and that he was the one whom the prophets had foretold would come into the world.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">John 5:28, 29</a>; <strong><em>read </em></strong><span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79"><strong><em>John 11:25-27</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>21, 22. </strong>(a) How did Jesus reveal his feelings for those who mourn? (b) Describe the resurrection of Lazarus.</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do Jehovah God and his Son, Jesus Christ, value faith like that of Martha? The events that next unfolded before Martha’s eyes provide the clearest of answers. She hurried to get her sister. Thereafter, she saw that Jesus was deeply moved as he talked to Mary and the many mourners with her. She saw the tears come to his eyes as he freely showed his deep grief over the pain that death causes. She heard Jesus order that the stone be rolled away from her brother’s tomb.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">John 11:28-39</a>.</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Ever practical, Martha objected that the body would smell by now, four days after death. Jesus reminded her: “Did I not tell you that if you would believe you would see the glory of God?” She did believe, and she did see the glory of Jehovah God. Right then and there, he empowered his Son to bring Lazarus back to life! Think of the moments that must have been etched in Martha’s memory to the end of her days: Jesus’ commanding call, “Lazarus, come on out!”; the faint noise from the cave where Lazarus was entombed as the man rose and, still bound in the bandages used to prepare the body, inched his way to the door of the cave; Jesus’ command to “loose him and let him go”; and, to be sure, the ecstatic embrace as Martha and Mary flew into their brother’s arms. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81"><strong><em>John 11:40-44</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>The burden on Martha’s heart was lifted!</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>23. </strong>What do Jehovah and Jesus want to do for you, and what do you need to do?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>This account shows that the resurrection of the dead is not mere wishful thinking; it is a heartwarming Bible teaching and a proven historical reality. (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Job 14:14, 15</a>) Jehovah and his Son love to reward faith, as they did in the case of Martha, Mary, and Lazarus. They have such rewards in store for you too if you build strong faith.</p>
<h2><strong>“Martha Was Ministering”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>24. </strong>The Bible record gives us what last glimpse of Martha?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>The Bible record mentions Martha just one more time. It was at the outset of the final week of Jesus’ life on earth. Knowing well what hardships lay ahead of him, Jesus again chose that haven at Bethany as his residence. From there he would walk the two miles (3 km) to Jerusalem. Jesus and Lazarus were dining at the home of Simon the leper, and there we get this last glimpse of our subject: “Martha was ministering.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">John 12:2</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>25. </strong>Why are congregations today blessed to have women like Martha?</p>
<p class="p30"><strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>How typical of that industrious woman! When we first come upon her in the Bible, she is working; when we leave her, she is still working, doing her best to care for the needs of those around her. Congregations of Christ’s followers today are blessed to have women like Martha<wbr />—stouthearted and generous, always putting their faith into action by giving of themselves. Did Martha keep doing just that? It seems likely. If so, she acted wisely, for she had yet to meet her share of obstacles.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>26. </strong>What did Martha’s faith help her to do?</p>
<p class="p31"><strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Within days, Martha had to endure the terrible death of her beloved Master, Jesus. Further, the same murderous hypocrites who killed him were determined to kill Lazarus as well, since his resurrection was boosting the faith of so many. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84"><strong><em>John 12:9-11</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>And, of course, death did eventually sever the loving bonds that joined Martha to her siblings. We do not know how or when that happened, but we may be fairly sure of this: Martha’s precious faith helped her endure to the end. That is why Christians today do well to imitate the faith of Martha.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(John 11:5)</strong> Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazʹa·rus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(John 11:1)</strong> Now a man named Lazʹa·rus was sick; he was from Bethʹa·ny, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(John 11:3)</strong> So his sisters sent a message to him, saying: “Lord, see! the one you have affection for is sick.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(John 11:18-20)</strong> Now Bethʹa·ny was near Jerusalem, about two miles* away. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them concerning their brother. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went to meet him; but Mary kept sitting at home.</p><p></p><p>About three km. Lit., “about 15 stadia.” See App. B14.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(John 11:21-23)</strong> Martha then said to Jesus: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Yet even now I know that whatever you ask God for, God will give you.” <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Jesus said to her: “Your brother will rise.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(John 11:24)</strong> Martha said to him: “I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 12:13)</strong> “But as for you, go on to the end. You will rest, but you will stand up for your lot* at the end of the days.”</p><p></p><p>Or “in your allotted place.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Mark 12:18)</strong> Now the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came and asked him:</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(John 11:25-27)</strong></a> Jesus said to her: “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life; <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>and everyone who is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all. Do you believe this?” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>She said to him: “Yes, Lord, I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming into the world.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(John 5:28, 29)</strong> Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, and those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(John 11:25-27)</strong> Jesus said to her: “I am the resurrection and the life. The one who exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life; <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>and everyone who is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all. Do you believe this?” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>She said to him: “Yes, Lord, I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming into the world.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(John 11:28-39)</strong> When she had said this, she went off and called Mary her sister, saying privately: “The Teacher is here and is calling you.” <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>On hearing this, she got up quickly and went to him. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Jesus had not yet come into the village, but he was still in the place where Martha had met him. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>When the Jews who were with Mary in the house consoling her saw her get up quickly and go out, they followed her, supposing that she was going to the tomb* to weep there. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>When Mary arrived where Jesus was and caught sight of him, she fell at his feet and said to him: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.” <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>When Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who had come with her weeping, he groaned within himself* and became troubled. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>He said: “Where have you laid him?” They said to him: “Lord, come and see.” <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Jesus gave way to tears. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>At that the Jews began to say: “See, what affection he had for him!” <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>But some of them said: “Could not this man who opened the eyes of the blind man prevent this one from dying?” <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>Then Jesus, after groaning again within himself, came to the tomb.* It was, in fact, a cave, and a stone was lying against it. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>Jesus said: “Take the stone away.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, said to him: “Lord, by now he must smell, for it has been four days.”</p><p></p><p>Or “memorial tomb.”</p><p>Lit., “in the spirit.”</p><p>Or “memorial tomb.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(John 11:40-44)</strong> Jesus said to her: “Did I not tell you that if you would believe you would see the glory of God?” <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>So they took the stone away. Then Jesus raised his eyes heavenward and said: “Father, I thank you that you have heard me. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>True, I knew that you always hear me; but I spoke on account of the crowd standing around, so that they may believe that you sent me.” <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>When he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice: “Lazʹa·rus, come out!” <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>The man who had been dead came out with his feet and hands bound with wrappings, and his face was wrapped with a cloth. Jesus said to them: “Free him and let him go.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 23</span></a> <strong>(Job 14:14, 15)</strong> If a man dies, can he live again? I will wait all the days of my compulsory service Until my relief comes. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>You will call, and I will answer you. You will long* for the work of your hands.</p><p></p><p>Or “yearn.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 24</span></a> <strong>(John 12:2)</strong> So they spread an evening meal for him there, and Martha was serving them, but Lazʹa·rus was one of those dining* with him.</p><p></p><p>Or “reclining at the table.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 26</span></a> <strong>(John 12:9-11)</strong> Meanwhile, a large crowd of Jews got to know that he was there, and they came not only because of Jesus but also to see Lazʹa·rus, whom he had raised up from the dead. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The chief priests now conspired to kill Lazʹa·rus also, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>since it was because of him that many of the Jews were going there and putting faith in Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***ia chap. 20 “I Have Believed”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>TO THINK ABOUT . . .</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p35">  What can we learn from the counsel Jesus gave Martha?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p36">  In what ways did Martha display a giving, industrious spirit?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p37">  How did Martha show remarkable faith?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p38">  In what ways would you like to imitate the faith of Martha?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016250.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***snnw song 143 Light in a Darkened World***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 143</p>
<h1><strong>Light in a Darkened World</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">2 Corinthians 4:6</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             In these days, dark and lawless days,</p>
<p class="p8">Shines a light we can see.</p>
<p class="p9">Like the dawn of another day</p>
<p class="p10">That will soon come to be.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p11">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p12">Shining through the darkness,</p>
<p class="p13">Ours is a message so bright.</p>
<p class="p14">It offers hope and light—</p>
<p class="p15">Sparkling like the daylight,</p>
<p class="p16">Bringing tomorrow in sight—</p>
<p class="p17">So ends the night.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">             Those who sleep need awakening</p>
<p class="p19">As the time ebbs away.</p>
<p class="p20">We give hope and encouragement.</p>
<p class="p21">For their future we’ll pray.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p22">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p23">Shining through the darkness,</p>
<p class="p24">Ours is a message so bright.</p>
<p class="p25">It offers hope and light—</p>
<p class="p26">Sparkling like the daylight,</p>
<p class="p27">Bringing tomorrow in sight—</p>
<p class="p28">So ends the night.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p29">(See also <span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">John 3:19;</a><span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87"> 8:12;</a><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"> Rom. 13:11, 12;</a><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"> 1 Pet. 2:9</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <strong>(2 Cor. 4:6)</strong></a> For God is the one who said: “Let the light shine out of darkness,” and he has shone on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God by the face of Christ.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <strong>(John 3:19)</strong></a> Now this is the basis for judgment: that the light has come into the world, but men have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <strong>(John 8:12)</strong></a> Then Jesus spoke again to them, saying: “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will by no means walk in darkness, but will possess the light of life.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <strong>(Rom. 13:11, 12)</strong></a> And do this because you know the season, that it is already the hour for you to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The night is well along; the day has drawn near. Let us therefore throw off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:9)</strong></a> But you are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies”* of the One who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the virtues,” that is, his praiseworthy qualities and deeds.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
