<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Do You Remember?</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/w16_44.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><header>
<h1 class="featureTtl" id="p1" data-pid="1"><span id="page32" class="pageNum" data-no="32" data-before-text="32"></span><strong>Do You Remember?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<div id="section1" class="section">
<div class="pGroup">
<p id="p2" data-pid="2" class="p2">Have you carefully read the recent issues of <em>The Watchtower? </em>Well, see if you can answer the following questions:</p>
<p id="p3" data-pid="3" class="p3"><strong>Why did Jehovah approve of the wars of ancient Israel?</strong></p>
<p id="p4" data-pid="4" class="p4">Jehovah is loving. Yet, on occasion, he authorized warfare when wickedness and oppression threatened his people. God alone determined who would engage in warfare and when.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource1"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation1"><em>w15 </em>11/1, pp. 4-5</a>.</p>
<p id="p5" data-pid="5" class="p5"><strong>What important things can parents do to train their teenagers to serve Jehovah?</strong></p>
<p id="p6" data-pid="6" class="p6">It is vital that parents have love for their teenage children and show humility by their example. It is also important that the parents show insight and strive to understand their teenagers.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource2"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation2"><em>w15 </em>11/15, pp. 9-11</a>.</p>
<p id="p7" data-pid="7" class="p7"><strong>Why should the pope not be considered Peter’s successor?</strong></p>
<p id="p8" data-pid="8" class="p8"><span id="citationsource1"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation1">Matthew 16:17, 18</a> does not say that the apostle Peter would be head of the Christian congregation. The Bible shows that rather than Peter having primacy, Jesus was to be the cornerstone of the congregation. (<span id="citationsource2"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation2">1 Pet. 2:4-8</a>)<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource3"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation3"><em>w15 </em>12/1, pp. 12-14</a>.</p>
<p id="p9" data-pid="9" class="p9"><strong>We should consider what things before speaking?</strong></p>
<p id="p10" data-pid="10" class="p10">To do good with our tongue, we should keep in mind (1) when to speak (<span id="citationsource3"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation3">Eccl. 3:7</a>), (2) what to speak (<span id="citationsource4"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation4">Prov. 12:18</a>), and (3) how to speak (<span id="citationsource5"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation5">Prov. 25:15</a>).<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource4"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation4"><em>w15 </em>12/15, pp. 19-22</a>.</p>
<p id="p11" data-pid="11" class="p11"><strong>What are some dishonest ways that Christians avoid?</strong></p>
<p id="p12" data-pid="12" class="p12">True Christians avoid both lying to and slandering others. They do not make false, malicious statements that injure others, and they neither commit fraud nor steal.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource5"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation5"><em>wp16.1, </em>p. 5</a>.</p>
<p id="p13" data-pid="13" class="p13"><strong>Who were the “chief priests” mentioned in the Bible?</strong></p>
<p id="p14" data-pid="14" class="p14">The expression “chief priests” evidently refers to principal members of the priesthood, including former high priests who had been deposed.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource6"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation6"><em>wp16.1, </em>p. 10</a>.</p>
<p id="p15" data-pid="15" class="p15"><strong>How should we treat someone who partakes of the Memorial emblems?</strong></p>
<p id="p16" data-pid="16" class="p16">Christians do not exalt such partakers. One who is truly anointed would not want to be exalted; nor would he want to publicize his standing with God. (<span id="citationsource6"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation6">Matt. 23:8-12</a>)<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource7"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation7"><em>w16.01, </em>pp. 23-24</a>.</p>
<p id="p17" data-pid="17" class="p17"><strong>What can we learn from how Abraham became God’s friend?</strong></p>
<p id="p18" data-pid="18" class="p18">Abraham took in knowledge about God, perhaps from Shem. And Abraham gained experience from the way God dealt with him and his family. We can try to do similarly.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource8"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation8"><em>w16.02, </em>pp. 9-10</a>.</p>
<p id="p19" data-pid="19" class="p19"><strong>How did Bible chapter and verse numbering come about?</strong></p>
<p id="p20" data-pid="20" class="p20">The 13th-century cleric Stephen Langton divided the Bible into chapters. Jewish copyists first assigned verses to the Hebrew Bible, and in the 16th century, scholar Robert Estienne did likewise for the Christian Greek Scriptures.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource9"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation9"><em>wp16.2, </em>pp. 14-15</a>.</p>
<p id="p21" data-pid="21" class="p21"><strong>Did Satan physically take Jesus to the temple to tempt him?</strong></p>
<p id="p22" data-pid="22" class="p22">We cannot say for sure. <span id="citationsource7"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation7">Matthew 4:5 and</a><span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8"> Luke 4:9</a> could mean that Jesus was taken there in a vision or that he stood on some high place in the temple precinct.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource10"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation10"><em>w16.03, </em>pp. 31-32</a>.</p>
<p id="p23" data-pid="23" class="p23"><strong>In what ways can our Christian ministry be like dew?</strong></p>
<p id="p24" data-pid="24" class="p24">Dew forms gradually and is refreshing and life-sustaining. Actual dew is a blessing from God. (<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Deut. 33:13</a>) The combined effort of God’s people in the ministry is similar.<wbr />—<span id="pcitationsource11"></span><a href="2016450-extracted.xhtml#pcitation11"><em>w16.04, </em>p. 4</a>.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p id="p25" data-pid="25" class="p25"></p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation1"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Matt. 16:17, 18)</strong></a> In response Jesus said to him: “Happy you are, Simon son of Joʹnah, because flesh and blood* did not reveal it to you, but my Father in the heavens did. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Also, I say to you: You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my congregation, and the gates of the Grave* will not overpower it.</p><p></p><p>Or “because a human.”</p><p>Or “Hades,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation2"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource2">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:4-8)</strong></a> As you come to him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen, precious to God, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>you yourselves as living stones are being built up into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, in order to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For it says in Scripture: “Look! I am laying in Zion a chosen stone, a precious foundation cornerstone, and no one exercising faith in it will ever be disappointed.”* <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>It is to you, therefore, that he is precious, because you are believers; but to those not believing, “the stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone”* <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>and “a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.” They are stumbling because they are disobedient to the word. To this very end they were appointed.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “put to shame.”</p><p>Lit., “the head of the corner.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation3"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource3">^ <strong>(Eccl. 3:7)</strong></a> A time to rip apart and a time to sew together; A time to be silent and a time to speak;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation4"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource4">^ <strong>(Prov. 12:18)</strong></a> Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, But the tongue of the wise is a healing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation5"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource5">^ <strong>(Prov. 25:15)</strong></a> By patience a commander is won over, And a gentle* tongue can break a bone.</p><p></p><p>Or “mild.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation6"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource6">^ <strong>(Matt. 23:8-12)</strong></a> But you, do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Moreover, do not call anyone your father on earth, for one is your Father, the heavenly One. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Neither be called leaders, for your Leader is one, the Christ. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the greatest one among you must be your minister. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation7"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Matt. 4:5)</strong></a> Then the Devil took him along into the holy city, and he stationed him on the battlement* of the temple</p><p></p><p>Or “parapet; highest point.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Luke 4:9)</strong></a> He then led him into Jerusalem and stationed him on the battlement* of the temple and said to him: “If you are a son of God, throw yourself down from here,</p><p></p><p>Or “parapet; highest point.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Deut. 33:13)</strong></a> Of Joseph he said: “May his land be blessed by Jehovah With the choice things of heaven, With dew and the waters from the springs below,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
