<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 6/16 Do Not Let the Faults of Others Stumble You</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016447.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 121 Encourage One Another***</strong></a><br />Song 121</p><p><strong>Encourage One Another</strong></p><p>(Hebrews 10:24, 25)</p><p>1. As we encourage one another</p><p>To serve Jehovah faithfully,</p><p>We find the bonds of love are strengthened;</p><p>Fine works bring peace and unity.</p><p>The love we find among God’s people</p><p>Gives each the courage to endure.</p><p>Our congregation is a refuge,</p><p>A place where we can feel secure.</p><p>2. A word when spoken at the right time</p><p>Is, oh, how comforting to hear!</p><p>We hear these words of consolation</p><p>From friends so faithful and so dear.</p><p>How good it is to work together</p><p>With those whose hopes and goals we share!</p><p>We seek to strengthen one another</p><p>And help each one his burden bear.</p><p>3. As we with eyes of faith are seeing</p><p>The nearness of Jehovah’s day,</p><p>We need our gathering together</p><p>To keep us walking in the way.</p><p>United with Jehovah’s people,</p><p>We hope to serve eternally.</p><p>So we encourage one another</p><p>To hold to our integrity.</p><p>(See also Luke 22:32; Acts 14:21, 22; Gal. 6:2; 1 Thess. 5:14.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016447.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 75 Our Reasons for Joy***</strong></a><br />Song 75</p><p><strong>Our Reasons for Joy</strong></p><p>(Matthew 5:12)</p><p>1. Our reasons for joy are abundant,</p><p>Like riches increasing in worth.</p><p>Desirable things of all nations</p><p>Are joining us in all the earth.</p><p>The joy in our heart is well-founded,</p><p>With roots reaching deep in God’s Word.</p><p>We daily partake of its teachings;</p><p>Faith follows the things we have heard.</p><p>Our causes for joy are deep-seated,</p><p>Like embers that burn in our hearts.</p><p>Though troubles and trials beset us,</p><p>Endurance Jehovah imparts.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Jehovah our God is our joy,</p><p>The work of his hands our delight.</p><p>How deep are his thoughts, how great are his works,</p><p>Abounding in goodness and might!</p><p>2. We gladly behold his productions,</p><p>The heavens, the sea, and the land.</p><p>We gaze at the book of creation,</p><p>Applauding the work of his hand.</p><p>Triumphantly we now bear witness,</p><p>Proclaiming the Kingdom of God.</p><p>The news of its birth and its blessings,</p><p>We joyously spread all abroad.</p><p>Eternal rejoicing approaches,</p><p>Like daylight that follows the night.</p><p>The promised new earth and new heavens</p><p>Will bring everlasting delight.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Jehovah our God is our joy,</p><p>The work of his hands our delight.</p><p>How deep are his thoughts, how great are his works,</p><p>Abounding in goodness and might!</p><p>(See also Deut. 16:15; Isa. 12:6; John 15:11.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
