<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 6/16 Do You Remember?</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***w15 11/1 pp. 4-5 God’s View of War in the Ancient Past***</strong></a><br /><strong>COVER SUBJECT | HOW DOES GOD VIEW WAR?</strong></p><p><strong>God’s View of War in the Ancient Past</strong></p><p>The people were being oppressed. They repeatedly prayed to God for relief, but none came<wbr />—at least not right away. The people were the Israelites, God’s people in ancient times. The oppressor was the mighty nation of Egypt. (Exodus 1:13, 14) For years, the Israelites waited for God to bring an end to the Egyptian tyranny. Eventually, God’s due time for action arrived. (Exodus 3:7-10) The Bible reports that God personally waged war against the Egyptians. He beset Egypt with a series of devastating plagues, and then he destroyed Egypt’s king and his army in the Red Sea. (Psalm 136:15) Jehovah God proved to be “a powerful warrior” in behalf of his people.<wbr />—Exodus 15:3, 4.</p><p>The fact that God himself waged war against the Egyptians shows that he is not against all warfare. On other occasions, he authorized his people Israel to wage war. For example, he commanded them to wage war against the Canaanites, who were exceedingly wicked. (Deuteronomy 9:5; 20:17, 18) He directed Israel’s King David to war against the oppressive Philistines. God even provided David with a battle strategy that ensured victory.<wbr />—2 Samuel 5:17-25.</p><p>Those Bible accounts reveal that when certain forms of wickedness and oppression threatened the Israelites, God authorized warfare for the protection of his people and the preservation of true worship. But note the following three key points about such God-ordained warfare.</p><p><strong>1.</strong> <strong>GOD ALONE DETERMINED <em>WHO </em>WOULD ENGAGE IN WARFARE. </strong>On one occasion, God told the Israelites: “You will not need to fight this battle.” The reason? God himself would wage war in their behalf. (2 Chronicles 20:17; 32:7, 8) He did so many times, such as on the occasion mentioned at the outset of this article. At other times, God commanded his people in ancient Israel to fight in wars that he approved, namely, those that involved securing and defending their Promised Land.<wbr />—Deuteronomy 7:1, 2; Joshua 10:40.</p><p><strong>2.</strong> <strong>GOD ALONE DETERMINED <em>WHEN </em>SUCH WARFARE WOULD TAKE PLACE. </strong>God’s servants were to wait patiently for God’s appointed time to war against the oppression and wickedness that surrounded them. Until then, they were not to take it upon themselves to engage in war. When they did, they lost divine approval. In fact, the Bible shows that when the Israelites presumed to engage in warfare that God had not authorized, the results were often disastrous.</p><p><strong>3.</strong> <strong>GOD TAKES NO PLEASURE IN THE DEATH OF HUMANS, INCLUDING THE WICKED. </strong>Jehovah God is the Source of life and the Creator of humankind. (Psalm 36:9) Therefore, he does not desire to see people die. Sadly, though, there are people who wickedly scheme to oppress and even kill others. (Psalm 37:12, 14) To halt such evil, God has at times authorized warfare against the wicked. And yet, throughout the years that he had the Israelites engage in such wars, he was still “merciful” and “slow to anger” toward Israel’s oppressors. (Psalm 86:15) For example, he decreed that before the Israelites warred against a city, they were to “announce to it terms of peace,” in order to give the inhabitants an opportunity to change their ways and avoid war. (Deuteronomy 20:10-13) In this way, God showed that he takes “no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that someone wicked changes his way and keeps living.”<wbr />—Ezekiel 33:11, 14-16.</p><p>From the foregoing we see that in the ancient past, God viewed warfare as a legitimate means of bringing an end to various forms of oppression and wickedness. But it was God<wbr />—not humans—<wbr />who rightfully determined <em>when </em>such warfare was to take place and <em>who </em>was to be involved. And did God wage war eagerly, in a bloodthirsty way? Quite the contrary. He actually hates violence. (Psalm 11:5) Did God’s view of war change when his Son, Jesus Christ, began his ministry in the first century?</p><p><strong>[Footnotes]</strong></p><p>For example, on one occasion, the Israelites suffered defeat when they engaged in war with the Amalekites and Canaanites after God had ordered them not to do so. (Numbers 14:41-45) Many years later, faithful King Josiah engaged in a battle without divine approval, and this rash action cost him his life.<wbr />—2 Chronicles 35:20-24.</p><p>The Israelites did not announce terms of peace before warring against the Canaanites. Why not? Because the Canaanites had been given 400 years to correct their wicked ways. By the time the Israelites came to war against them, the Canaanites, as a group, were incorrigibly wicked. (Genesis 15:13-16) Thus, they were to be completely annihilated. However, individual Canaanites who changed their ways were spared.<wbr />—Joshua 6:25; 9:3-27.</p><p><wbr /><strong>[Picture on page 5]</strong></p><p>Though God waged war against the Canaanites, he spared some, such as Rahab and her family</p><p><wbr /><wbr /></p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***w15 11/15 pp. 9-11 Train Your Teenager to Serve Jehovah***</strong></a><br />growth, even as Jesus did when he was young. <strong>(Read Luke 2:52.) </strong>What role do you as a parent play during those crucial years? Consider how Jesus, after he grew into adulthood, manifested love, humility, and insight. How can these qualities help you to train your teenager to serve Jehovah?</p><p><strong>LOVE YOUR TEENAGER</strong></p><p><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jesus was a loving and loyal friend. <strong>(Read John 15:15.) </strong>In Bible times, a master did not normally share his private thoughts and feelings with his slaves. However, Jesus proved to be both master and friend to his faithful apostles. He spent time with them, shared his feelings with them, and carefully listened when they poured out their hearts to him. (Mark 6:30-32) Such loving communication created a warm bond between Jesus and his apostles and prepared them for future responsibilities in God’s service.</p><p><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“While we as parents can’t be our children’s peers,” says Michael, a father of two, “we can be their friends.” Friends spend time together. Prayerfully consider whether you can adjust your secular work or other pursuits to spend more time with your children. Friends also share common interests. Therefore, make an effort to enjoy things that your teenager enjoys<wbr />—his favorite music, films, or sports. Ilaria, who lives in Italy, says: “My parents took an interest in the music I listened to. In fact, my dad became my best friend, and I felt free to talk to him about even delicate matters.” When you are a friend to your teenage children and help them to enjoy “close friendship with Jehovah,” you do not relinquish your authority as a parent. (Ps. 25:14) On the contrary, you show that you love and respect them, and you become more approachable. In turn, they are more likely to share their concerns with you.</p><p><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Jesus wanted his beloved disciples and friends to experience the joy that comes from a busy life in Jehovah’s service. Therefore, he desired that they zealously participate in spiritual activities. Indeed, Jesus wanted them to be ardent disciple-makers! And he lovingly assured his disciples that he would help them to succeed.<wbr />—Matt. 28:19, 20.</p><p><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You want your teenage children to remain spiritually healthy. And God wants you to bring your children up “in the discipline and admonition of Jehovah.” (Eph. 6:4) So use your God-given responsibility to establish and maintain a spiritual routine. To illustrate: You insist that your children be educated because their education is important and you hope to instill in them a love for learning. Loving parents likewise insist that their children benefit from the “admonition of Jehovah” at congregation meetings and through other spiritual programs. Because divine education is vital, you try to instill in your children love for spiritual things and appreciation for wisdom. (Prov. 24:14) As Jesus helped his disciples, you seek to help your teenage children to succeed in the ministry by developing in them a love of teaching God’s Word and by helping them stick to a good field service routine.</p><p><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>How can a consistent spiritual routine help teenagers? Erin, who lives in South Africa, admits: “We children often whined and complained about Bible study, meetings, and field service. Sometimes we deliberately disrupted our family study to try to get out of it. But our parents didn’t give in.” She adds: “That training helped me to develop perseverance. If my spiritual routine gets disrupted now, I have a longing to return to it as quickly as possible. I don’t think I would have developed that longing had our parents not been firm in maintaining a spiritual routine. Had they given in, I am quite sure I would now find it much easier to miss meetings or other spiritual activities.”</p><p><strong>TEACH HUMILITY BY YOUR EXAMPLE</strong></p><p><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Though Jesus was a perfect man, he humbly acknowledged his limitations and reliance on Jehovah. <strong>(Read John 5:19.) </strong>Did Jesus’ humility weaken his disciples’ respect for him? Not at all. In fact, the more he relied on Jehovah, the more his disciples trusted him. Later, they imitated Jesus’ humility.<wbr />—Acts 3:12, 13, 16.</p><p><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>We have many limitations, and unlike Jesus, we are imperfect and make mistakes. Humbly acknowledge your limitations and admit your mistakes. (1 John 1:8) After all, whom do you respect more? A boss who admits when he is wrong or one who does not apologize? When your teenager hears you apologize for your mistakes, his respect for you is likely increased. He may also learn to admit his own errors. “We admitted our mistakes, and that moved our children to open up to us when they had a problem,” says Rosemary, a mother of three grown children. “We realized our limitations, so we taught our children where to find the best solutions to their problems. When they needed help, we always referred them to our Bible-based literature, and we prayed together.”</p><p><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Jesus had the authority to issue commands to his followers. Humbly, though, he often gave <em>reasons </em>for a command. For example, he did not just tell his followers to seek first the Kingdom and God’s righteousness but said: “And all these other things will be added to you.” After saying, “Stop judging,” Jesus gave this reason: “That you may not be judged; for with the judgment you are judging, you will be judged.”<wbr />—Matt. 6:31–7:2.</p><p><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When appropriate, explain the reasons behind a rule or a decision you make. If a teenager understands your thinking on the matter, he is more likely to obey you from a willing heart. “Giving reasons helps teenagers to trust you because they see that your decisions are not arbitrary or capricious but reasonable,” says Barry, who raised four children. A teenager is also maturing into an adult with his own “power of reason.” (Rom. 12:1) Barry explains: “Teenagers need to learn to make sensible decisions based on reason rather than emotion.” (Ps. 119:34) When you humbly give reasons for your decisions, your adolescent can sense that you recognize that he is progressing toward maturity, and he learns to make his own decisions with his “power of reason.”</p><p><strong>SHOW INSIGHT, AND UNDERSTAND YOUR TEENAGER</strong></p><p><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Jesus showed insight and understood where his disciples needed help. For instance, the apostle Peter meant well when he urged Jesus to be kind to himself in order not to be killed. Jesus, however, knew that Peter’s comment reflected faulty thinking. To help him and the other disciples, Jesus gave frank counsel, stated the consequences of a self-sparing attitude, and outlined the blessings of a self-sacrificing spirit. (Matt. 16:21-27) Peter learned the lesson.<wbr />—1 Pet. 2:20, 21.</p><p><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Pray to Jehovah to give you insight so that you can understand where your teenager needs help. (Ps. 32:8) For example, what might indicate that your child’s faith is wavering? Perhaps his joy is waning, he is speaking critically of fellow believers, or he has become secretive. Do not hastily conclude that these are signs of a double life involving serious sin. On the other hand, do not ignore such signs or dismiss your teenager’s isolation as a mere phase.</p><p><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like Jesus, ask questions kindly and respectfully. As drawing a bucket of water out of a well too quickly will cause you to lose some of the water, confronting your teen too forcefully may make you squander a valuable opportunity to learn his thoughts and intentions. <strong>(Read Proverbs 20:5.) </strong>Ilaria,</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w15 12/1 pp. 12-14 Was Peter the First Pope?***</strong></a><br /><strong>Was Peter the First Pope?</strong></p><p>“Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio, S.J., has been elected as Supreme Pontiff, the 265th successor of Peter.”<wbr />—<em>VATICAN INFORMATION SERVICE</em>, VATICAN CITY, MARCH 13, 2013.</p><p>“The bishop of Rome has the right of primacy above the universal Church, since he is the successor of Saint Peter, who received such prerogative from Jesus Christ.”<wbr />—<em>THE PRIMACY OF THE BISHOP OF ROME DURING THE FIRST THREE CENTURIES, </em>1903, BY VINCENT ERMONI.</p><p>“If, then, anyone shall say . . . that the Roman Pontiff is not the successor of Blessed Peter in this primacy; let him be anathema [that is, be declared a heretic].”<wbr />—THE FIRST VATICAN COUNCIL, JULY 18, 1870.</p><p>TO MILLIONS of Catholics around the world, the 1870 decree of the first Vatican Council is a dogma of the church, a binding teaching. However, the question must be asked, Is it a <em>Scriptural </em>teaching? In addition, is Pope Francis really a successor of the apostle Peter? And was Peter the first pope?</p><p><strong>“UPON THIS ROCK I WILL BUILD MY CHURCH”</strong></p><p>The 1870 Vatican Council’s decree was based primarily on its interpretation of Matthew 16:16-19 and John 21:15-17. The conversations between Jesus and Peter that we read in these passages as well as other Bible accounts show that the apostle Peter had an important role in the history of early Christianity. In fact, the first time they met, Jesus predicted that Peter would display rocklike qualities in his life. (John 1:42) But did Christ give Peter primacy?</p><p>At Matthew 16:17, 18, we find Jesus’ words to Peter: “I say to you, you are Peter [whose name means “A Piece of Rock”], and upon this rock I will build my church.” Was Jesus saying that his “church,” or congregation, would be built upon Peter, a man? Was Peter to be the head of all other followers of Jesus? How did the other apostles present at that conversation understand Jesus’ words? The Gospels reveal that later, on a number of occasions, they argued about who was the greatest among them. (Matthew 20:20-27; Mark 9:33-35; Luke 22:24-26) If Jesus had already given Peter primacy, or superiority, could there have been any question as to who was the greatest among the apostles?</p><p>How did Peter himself understand Jesus’ words? Growing up an Israelite, Peter would have been familiar with various Hebrew prophecies speaking of a “stone” or a “cornerstone.” (Isaiah 8:13, 14; 28:16; Zechariah 3:9) When he quoted one of them in a letter to his fellow believers, Peter explained that the prophesied “cornerstone” was the Lord Jesus Christ, the Messiah. Peter used the Greek term <em>pe’tra </em>(the same word found in Jesus’ statement at Matthew 16:18) for Christ alone.<wbr />—1 Peter 2:4-8.</p><p>The apostle Paul was another faithful follower of Jesus. Did Paul believe that Jesus had given Peter primacy? Acknowledging Peter’s position in the early Christian congregation, Paul wrote that Peter was among those “reputed to be pillars.” For Paul, there was more than just one ‘pillar.’ (Galatians 2:9) Moreover, if Peter had been appointed by Jesus as the head of the congregation, how could he simply be <em>reputed, </em>that is to say, supposed or thought by his fellow believers, to be a pillar?</p><p>When writing regarding certain inconsistencies in the way Peter treated people, Paul respectfully but frankly stated: “I opposed him to his face because he clearly was wrong.” (Galatians 2:11-14) Paul did not think that Christ had built his church, or congregation, upon Peter or any other imperfect man. On the contrary, he believed that the congregation was built on Jesus Christ as the foundation. For Paul, “the rock was the Christ.”<wbr />—1 Corinthians 3:9-11; 10:4.</p><p><strong>“YOU ARE PETER . . .”</strong></p><p>So how are we to understand the words: “You are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church”? To understand an excerpt correctly, we need to read its context. What were Jesus and Peter speaking about? Jesus had just asked his disciples: “Who do you say that I am?” Without hesitation, Peter answered: “You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God.” With that, Jesus commended Peter and then added that he would build his “church,” or congregation, on an even more solid “rock,” the one in whom Peter had just expressed faith<wbr />—Jesus himself.<wbr />—Matthew 16:15-18.</p><p>Consistent with this, many of the “Church Fathers” wrote that the rock of Matthew 16:18 is Christ. For example, Augustine in the fifth century wrote: “The Lord said: ‘On this rock-mass I will build my Church,’ because Peter had told him: ‘You are the Christ the Son of the living God.’ It is therefore on this rock-mass, that you confessed, that I will build my Church.” Augustine repeatedly stated that “the Rock (<em>Petra</em>) was Christ.”</p><p>Augustine and others would be considered heretics if judged according to current Catholic doctrine. In fact, according to Swiss theologian Ulrich Luz, the consensus of opinion on this subject among Bible scholars today would have been condemned by the 1870 Vatican Council as heresy.</p><p><strong>THE POPE<wbr />—PETER’S SUCCESSOR?</strong></p><p>The title “pope” was unknown to the apostle Peter. In fact, until the ninth century, many non-Roman bishops applied the title to themselves. Even so, the term was rarely applied as an official title until the late 11th century. Moreover, no early Christian thought that a primacy supposedly given to Peter had been transmitted to any successors. Hence, German scholar Martin Hengel concluded that there is “no demonstrable historical and theological way to arrive at what later became papal ‘primacy.’”</p><p>In conclusion: Was Peter the first pope? Did he have any successors? Is the Catholic dogma of papal primacy Scripturally valid? The only correct answer to each question is a simple no. Nevertheless, the fact remains that Jesus unquestionably <em>did </em>build his church, his true congregation, upon himself. (Ephesians 2:20) For each one of us, then, the important question is, Have I found that true congregation?</p><p><strong>[Footnote]</strong></p><p>All Biblical quotations in this article are from the Catholic <em>New American Bible, </em>the version used in the official Vatican website.</p><p><strong>[Box on page 14]</strong></p><p><strong>The Evolution of Papal Primacy</strong></p><p><strong>32 C.E.: </strong>Jesus foretells he will build his church, or congregation, upon himself; no primacy conferred on the apostle Peter</p><p><strong>55-64: </strong>The apostles Paul and Peter write various letters with the underlying thought that Jesus is the only foundation of the Christian congregation</p><p><strong>254-257: </strong>Stephen, bishop of Rome, advances the idea that he has primacy over other bishops as the successor of Peter; but other bishops, such as Firmilian of Caesarea and Cyprian of Carthage, reject Stephen’s claim</p><p><strong>296-304: </strong>First known inscription attesting the use of the title “papa,” or “pope,” with reference to the bishop of Rome</p><p><strong>5th century: </strong>Another bishop of Rome, Leo I, uses Matthew 16:18 to affirm his primacy over other bishops</p><p><strong>6th century: </strong>Increasing use of <em>papa </em>(pope) as a title for the Roman bishop; however, non-Roman bishops continue to apply the term to themselves until the ninth century</p><p><strong>1075: </strong>Gregory VII declares that “pope” is an exclusive title for the bishop of Rome; his <em>Dictatus Papae </em>(Papal Dictates) makes the papacy “appear as a replacement for Christ,” according to one historian</p><p><strong>1870: </strong>The First Vatican Council decrees that “the Roman pontiff is the successor of Blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and is true Vicar of Christ, and Head of the whole Church”</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 13]</strong></p><p>How are we to understand Jesus’ words: “You are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church”?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 14]</strong></p><p><strong>[Credit Line]</strong></p><p>Library of Congress, Prints &amp; Photographs Division, LC-DIG-pga-03306</p><p><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /></p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w15 12/15 pp. 19-22 Use the Power of Your Tongue for Good***</strong></a><br />use its power to honor God and to benefit others.<wbr />—Ps. 19:14.</p><p><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Whether we use sounds from our mouth or signs with our hands, the ability to communicate our thoughts and feelings is a marvelous gift from God. How can we use this gift to build up, not tear down? <strong>(Read James 3:9, 10.) </strong>We will consider three important aspects of speech: when to speak, what to speak, and how to speak.</p><p><strong>WHEN TO SPEAK</strong></p><p><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Speech is part of our daily life, but we do not need to talk all the time. In fact, the Bible says that there is “a time to be silent.” (Eccl. 3:7) Maintaining silence when others are speaking can be a mark of respect. (Job 6:24) Controlling our tongue to keep quiet about a confidential matter gives evidence of discretion and discernment. (Prov. 20:19) Restraining our tongue when we are provoked is the course of wisdom.<wbr />—Ps. 4:4.</p><p><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>On the other hand, the Bible also says that there is “a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:7) If a friend gave you a beautiful present, you would probably not store it out of sight. Rather, you would show your appreciation by putting it to good use. We show our gratitude for Jehovah’s gift of speech by using it wisely. That might include expressing our feelings, communicating our needs, sharing words of encouragement, and giving God praise. (Ps. 51:15) How can we determine the best “time to speak”?</p><p><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The words of Proverbs 25:11 illustrate the importance of choosing the right time to speak: “Like apples of gold in silver carvings is a word spoken at the right time.” Golden apples by themselves would be beautiful. Placing them against the background of silver carvings would enhance their beauty. Similarly, carefully picking a suitable time to speak can make our speech more appealing and effective. How?</p><p><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Our words may be just what our hearer truly needs, but unless we discern the best time to speak, their meaning could be lost. <strong>(Read Proverbs 15:23.) </strong>For example, in March 2011 an earthquake and tsunami devastated parts of eastern Japan, wiping out entire cities. More than 15,000 lost their lives. Although Jehovah’s Witnesses in the area suffered along with their neighbors, they took advantage of every opportunity to use the Bible to comfort those who were mourning. However, many of the local people have deep-rooted Buddhist beliefs and little or no knowledge of Bible teachings. Our brothers discerned that immediately following the tsunami was not necessarily the best time to tell the grief-stricken victims about the resurrection hope. Instead, they used their gift of speech to focus on giving emotional support and explaining from the Bible why such terrible things happen to innocent people.</p><p><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jesus knew when not to speak, but he also knew when it was the right time to speak. (John 18:33-37; 19:8-11) He once told his disciples: “I still have many things to say to you, but you are not able to bear them now.” (John 16:12) The Witnesses in eastern Japan followed Jesus’ example. Two and a half years after the tsunami, they shared in a worldwide campaign to distribute <em>Kingdom News </em>No. 38, entitled “Can the Dead Really Live Again?” At that time, more people were ready to be comforted by the heartwarming message of the resurrection, and many householders readily accepted their personal copy of the tract. Of course, cultures and religious beliefs vary greatly, so we need to be discerning when it comes to choosing the right time to speak.</p><p><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>There definitely are occasions when we need to discern the right time to speak. For example, someone may offend us, even with well-intentioned words. It would be prudent on our part to take time to reflect on whether the matter is serious enough to say something. If we must speak, it would not be wise to approach the offender when we are upset and perhaps might speak a bit rashly. <strong>(Read Proverbs 15:28.)</strong> Similarly, we need to be discerning when speaking about the truth to our unbelieving relatives. We want them to come to know Jehovah, but we must be patient and perceptive. Speaking the right words at the right time may help to open their hearts.</p><p><strong>WHAT TO SPEAK</strong></p><p><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Words have the power to hurt as well as to heal. <strong>(Read Proverbs 12:18.) </strong>Using words to inflict pain is common in Satan’s world. The field of entertainment incites many to “sharpen their tongue just like a sword” and to “aim their cruel words like arrows.” (Ps. 64:3) A Christian needs to avoid this harmful practice. One example of “cruel words” is sarcasm, stinging remarks intended to belittle or rebuke others. Sarcasm is often meant to be humorous, but it can quickly deteriorate into disrespectful, insulting speech. Cruel sarcasm is one form of abusive speech that Christians should “put away.” Humor can add spice to our speech, but we need to avoid the trap of trying to evoke a laugh by resorting to cutting, sarcastic quips that hurt or humiliate others. The Bible admonishes us: “Let a rotten word not come out of your mouth, but only what is good for building up as the need may be, to impart what is beneficial to the hearers.”<wbr />—Eph. 4:29, 31.</p><p><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jesus taught that “out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (Matt. 12:34) Therefore, choosing the appropriate words begins in the heart. Our speech usually reflects how we truly feel about others. If our hearts are full of love and compassion, our speech will likely be positive and upbuilding.</p><p><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Selecting the proper words also involves mental effort and good judgment. Even wise King Solomon “pondered and made a thorough search” in order to “find delightful words and to record accurate words of truth.” (Eccl. 12:9, 10) Do you find that it is often a challenge to come up with “delightful words”? If so, you may need to enlarge your vocabulary. One way to do this is to take note of how words are used in the Bible and in our Christian publications. Learn the meanings of unfamiliar expressions. More important, learn how to use words in a way that helps others. Regarding the relationship between Jehovah and his firstborn Son, we read: “Jehovah has given me [Jesus] the tongue of those taught, so that I may know how to answer the tired one with the right word.” (Isa. 50:4) Taking time to meditate on what we are going to say can help us to find the right words. (Jas. 1:19) We could ask ourselves, ‘Will these words really convey what I want to say? What effect will my choice of words have on my listener?’</p><p><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Trumpets were used in Israel to assemble the camp and to disperse it, as well as to spur the army to do battle. Fittingly, the Bible uses the trumpet blast to illustrate the need for speech that is easily understood. An indistinct trumpet call could be disastrous for an advancing army. In the same way, if our speech is unduly vague or indirect, it may well be confusing or misleading. Of course, in our effort to keep our words crisp and clear, we would not want to be blunt or tactless.<wbr />—<strong>Read 1 Corinthians 14:8, 9.</strong></p><p><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Jesus set the finest example of appropriate word selection. Consider his short yet powerful discourse recorded in Matthew chapters 5 through 7. Jesus did not use flowery or ambiguous speech; nor did he employ harsh or hurtful language. Instead, he chose clear, simple expressions to reach the hearts of his listeners. For example, to allay the people’s anxieties over their daily need for food, he referred to how Jehovah provides for the birds of heaven. Then, comparing his hearers to birds, he asked: “Are you not worth more than they are?” (Matt. 6:26) What a loving appeal in simple, understandable words that touch the heart! Let us now consider the third important aspect of our speech.</p><p><strong>HOW TO SPEAK</strong></p><p><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>How we say something can be as important as what we say. When Jesus spoke in the synagogue of his hometown of Nazareth, the people were “amazed at the gracious words coming out of his mouth.” (Luke 4:22) Gracious speech appeals to the heart and in no way weakens the power of our tongue. In fact, graciousness can make our speech more persuasive. (Prov. 25:15) We can imitate Jesus’ gracious speech by being kind, courteous, and considerate of others’ feelings. Seeing the effort a crowd made to hear him speak, Jesus was moved with pity and “started to teach them many things.” (Mark 6:34) Even when he was being insulted, Jesus did not resort to harsh speech.<wbr />—1 Pet. 2:23.</p><p><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Speaking with mildness and tact can be a challenge when our listener is someone whom we know very well. We might feel at liberty to be very frank. That can be true whether we speak with a family member or a close friend in the congregation. Did Jesus feel that his close relationship with his disciples granted him liberty to speak harshly to them? Not at all! When his closest followers continued to argue over who was greater, Jesus corrected them with kind words and an illustration of a young child. (Mark 9:33-37) Elders can imitate Jesus’ example by giving counsel “in a spirit of mildness.”<wbr />—Gal. 6:1.</p><p><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Even when someone says something offensive, responding with gracious words can have positive results. (Prov. 15:1) For example, the teenage son of a single mother was leading a double life. A well-meaning Christian sister said to the mother: “It’s too bad you have failed at child training.” The mother thought for a moment and responded: “It’s true that things are not going well right now, but his training is a work in progress. Talk to me after Armageddon; then we will know for sure.” This mild response helped to maintain peace between the sisters, and it encouraged the son, who overheard the conversation. He realized that his mother had not given up on him. This moved him to stop his bad associations. In time, he got baptized, and he later served at Bethel. Whether in the company of our brothers, our family, or strangers, we should always let our words “be gracious, seasoned with salt.”<wbr />—Col. 4:6.</p><p><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The ability to express our thoughts and feelings in words is truly a marvel. May we follow Jesus’ example by choosing the right time, striving to select the proper words, and putting forth effort to be gracious. Then the power of our tongue will be a healing to our listeners and pleasing to Jehovah, the Giver of the precious gift of speech.</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 5 How Dishonesty Affects You***</strong></a><br /><strong>[Box on page 5]</strong></p><p><strong>Forms of Dishonesty</strong></p><p><strong>Lying</strong></p><p><strong>WHAT IS IT? </strong>Saying something false to someone who is entitled to know the truth. Lying can include misrepresenting or distorting facts in order to mislead a person, omitting key information to deceive someone, and exaggerating the truth in order to give a false impression.</p><p><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: </strong>“Jehovah detests a devious person, but His close friendship is with the upright.” (Proverbs 3:32) “Now that you have put away deceit, each one of you speak truth with his neighbor.”<wbr />—Ephesians 4:25.</p><p><strong>Slander</strong></p><p><strong>WHAT IS IT? </strong>Uttering false and malicious statements that injure a person’s reputation.</p><p><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: </strong>“A troublemaker causes dissension, and a slanderer separates close friends.” (Proverbs 16:28) “Where there is no wood, the fire goes out, and where there is no slanderer, quarreling ceases.”<wbr />—Proverbs 26:20.</p><p><strong>Fraud</strong></p><p><strong>WHAT IS IT? </strong>Inducing someone to part with money or property on false pretenses.</p><p><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: </strong>“You must not defraud a hired worker who is in need and poor.” (Deuteronomy 24:14, 15) “The one who defrauds the lowly one insults his Maker, but whoever shows compassion to the poor glorifies Him.”<wbr />—Proverbs 14:31.</p><p><strong>Stealing</strong></p><p><strong>WHAT IS IT? </strong>Taking property from a person without permission.</p><p><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS: </strong>“Let the one who steals steal no more; rather, let him do hard work, doing good work with his hands, so that he may have something to share with someone in need.” (Ephesians 4:28) “Do not be misled. . . . Thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers, and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.”<wbr />—1 Corinthians 6:9, 10.</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 10 Did You Know?***</strong></a><br /><strong>Who may have been the “chief priests” who were mentioned in the Christian Greek Scriptures?</strong></p><p>From the inception of the Israelite priesthood, only one man at a time served in the capacity of high priest, which initially was a lifelong appointment. (Numbers 35:25) Aaron was the first to serve in this capacity. Subsequently, the honor generally passed from father to oldest son. (Exodus 29:9) Many of Aaron’s male descendants served as priests, but only relatively few as high priests.</p><p>When Israel came under foreign domination, non-Israelite rulers appointed and removed Jewish high priests at will. It appears, however, that new appointees were almost always chosen from a select number of privileged families, mostly from the line of Aaron. The expression “chief priests” evidently refers to principal members of the priesthood. The chief priests may have included the heads of the 24 divisions of the priesthood; prominent members of high-priestly families; and former high priests who had been deposed, such as Annas.<wbr />—1 Chronicles 24:1-19; Matthew 2:4; Mark 8:31; Acts 4:6.</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w16 January pp. 23-24 “We Want to Go With You”***</strong></a><br />(4) Do you need to be concerned about any increase in the number of those partaking? Let us consider the answers to each of these questions.</p><p><strong>DO WE NEED TO KNOW THE NAMES OF ALL THE ANOINTED TODAY?</strong></p><p><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do those of the other sheep need to know the names of all those who are anointed today? The short answer is no. Why not? Because even if someone has received the heavenly calling, that person has received only an invitation, not a final confirmation of the reward. That is why Satan raises up “false prophets . . . to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones.” (Matt. 24:24) No one can know whether an anointed Christian will receive his heavenly reward until Jehovah judges that person to be worthy of such a prize. Jehovah makes this determination and gives him the final sealing either sometime before he dies faithfully or sometime before the outbreak of “the great tribulation.” (Rev. 2:10; 7:3, 14) It would be pointless, then, for anyone now living on earth to try to ascertain who among God’s servants will eventually be part of the 144,000.</p><p><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>If it is not possible to know with certainty the names of all spiritual Israelites on earth today, how can members of the other sheep “go with” them? Notice what the prophecy in Zechariah states concerning the figurative ten men. These ones would “take firm hold of the robe of a <em>Jew, </em>saying: ‘We want to go with <em>you, </em>for we have heard that God is with <em>you people.’” </em>Although only one Jew is mentioned here, in both instances the pronoun “you” refers to more than one person. This spiritual Jew must, then, be a composite person, not just one individual! So it is not necessary to identify every spiritual Jew and then go with him or her. Rather, we need to identify these ones <em>as a group </em>and then support them as such. In no way do the Scriptures encourage us to follow an individual. Jesus is our Leader.<wbr />—Matt. 23:10.</p><p><strong>HOW SHOULD ANOINTED CHRISTIANS VIEW THEMSELVES?</strong></p><p><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Those who partake of the emblems at the Memorial should carefully consider the warning found at <strong>1 Corinthians 11:27-29. (Read.) </strong>What point is the apostle Paul here making? An anointed Christian would partake unworthily if he did not maintain a good relationship with Jehovah. (Heb. 6:4-6; 10:26-29) Such a warning helps anointed Christians to remember that they have not yet taken hold of the reward. They need to continue to press on “toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.”<wbr />—Phil. 3:13-16.</p><p><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Under inspiration, Paul appealed to anointed Christians “to walk worthily of the calling with which [they] were called.” How should this be done? Paul goes on to say “with all humility and mildness, with patience, putting up with one another in love, earnestly endeavoring to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.” (Eph. 4:1-3) Jehovah’s spirit promotes humility, not pride. (Col. 3:12) Modestly, anointed ones acknowledge that they do not necessarily have more holy spirit than those with an earthly hope. They do not claim to have special knowledge or revelations; neither do they try to prove that they are in some way superior. They would also never suggest to others that these too have been anointed and should start partaking; rather, they would humbly acknowledge that it is Jehovah who does the calling of anointed ones.</p><p><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Although it is a wonderful privilege to have the heavenly calling, anointed Christians do not expect any special honor from others. (Eph. 1:18, 19; <strong>read Philippians 2:2, 3.) </strong>Jehovah’s spirit bore witness to them personally. No announcement was made to the world. So they are not surprised if some people do not readily believe that they have truly been anointed by holy spirit. In fact, they realize that the Scriptures advise against quickly believing someone who claims to have a special appointment from God. (Rev. 2:2) In no way, then, would they use their anointing as a “calling card” to introduce themselves to others. For the most part, they would not even mention this personal experience to others, so as to avoid drawing attention to themselves; neither would they want to boast about their future reward.<wbr />—1 Cor. 1:28, 29; <strong>read 1 Corinthians 4:6-8.</strong></p><p><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>In addition, anointed Christians do not view themselves as being part of an elite club. They do not seek out others who claim to have the same calling, hoping to bond with them or endeavoring to form private groups for Bible study. (Gal. 1:15-17) Such efforts would cause divisions within the congregation and work against the holy spirit, which promotes peace and unity.<wbr />—<strong>Read Romans 16:17, 18.</strong></p><p><strong>HOW SHOULD YOU REACT?</strong></p><p><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How should you treat someone who partakes of the Memorial emblems? Jesus told his disciples: “All of you are brothers.” He went on to say: “Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.” (Matt. 23:8-12) Therefore, it would be wrong to exalt individuals, even if they are anointed brothers of Christ. Speaking about Christian elders, the Bible encourages us to imitate the <em>faith </em>of those who take the lead, but it never commands us to elevate any <em>human </em>as our leader. (Heb. 13:7) True, the Scriptures speak of some as being “considered worthy of double honor.” However, such ones are worthy of honor, not because they are anointed, but because they “preside in a fine way” and “work hard in speaking and teaching.” (1 Tim. 5:17) Therefore, it would be embarrassing for those with a heavenly calling if others were to give them undue praise or attention. Worse still, if they received special treatment, anointed Christians might find it difficult to remain humble. (Rom. 12:3) None of us would want to cause one of Christ’s brothers to stumble!<wbr />—Luke 17:2.</p><p><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>How can we show appropriate respect for those whom Jehovah chooses to anoint? We would not ask them personal</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w16 February pp. 9-10 Jehovah Called Him “My Friend”***</strong></a><br />So let us see how Abraham’s faith led him to a close friendship with God. And each of us may well ask, ‘How can I imitate Abraham’s faith and strengthen my friendship with Jehovah?’</p><p><strong>HOW DID ABRAHAM BECOME JEHOVAH’S FRIEND?</strong></p><p><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Picture an elderly man trudging up a mountainside. He is making what must be the hardest journey of his life. It is not his age that makes this trek so daunting. Abraham may be about 125 years old, but he is still vigorous. Following him is a younger man, perhaps 25 years of age. It is his son Isaac, who is carrying firewood. Abraham has a knife and the means to start a fire. Jehovah has asked him to sacrifice his own son!<wbr />—Gen. 22:1-8.</p><p><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Abraham was facing what was likely the greatest test of his faith. There are those who say that God was cruel for asking such a thing of Abraham, and some imply that Abraham’s obedience was blind and unfeeling. They take that position because they have neither the faith nor the understanding of how faith works. (1 Cor. 2:14-16) Abraham did not obey God blindly. Instead, he obeyed because he could <em>see. </em>With eyes of genuine faith, he saw that his heavenly Father, Jehovah, never asks His faithful servants to do anything that will result in their lasting harm. Abraham <em>knew </em>that if he obeyed Jehovah, his God would bless him and his beloved son. On what was that faith based? On knowledge and experience.</p><p><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong><em>Knowledge. </em>Though he grew up in Ur, a Chaldean city rife with idolatry, Abraham came to know about Jehovah. How did that happen, considering that his own father, Terah, was an idolater? (Josh. 24:2) The Bible does not say specifically, but it reveals that Abraham was of the ninth generation descended from Shem, one of Noah’s sons and a man of great faith. Shem lived until Abraham was about 150 years old. We do not know for certain if Abraham learned about Jehovah from Shem. However, it seems safe to assume that Shem passed on to his family what he knew about Jehovah. Somehow that knowledge reached Abraham and touched his heart. He came to love the God he learned about, and that knowledge helped him to build faith.</p><p><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong><em>Experience. </em>How did Abraham acquire experience that strengthened his faith in Jehovah? It has been said that thoughts lead to feelings and feelings lead to actions. What Abraham learned about God produced in him a profound awe and heartfelt respect for “Jehovah the Most High God, Maker of heaven and earth.” (Gen. 14:22) The Bible calls that feeling “godly fear,” and it is essential to building a close friendship with God. (Heb. 5:7; Ps. 25:14) Such godly fear moved Abraham to action.</p><p><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God directed elderly Abraham and Sarah to leave Ur and move to a foreign land. They would live in tents for the rest of their days. By obeying, Abraham opened the way for Jehovah to bless and protect him. For example, Abraham feared that his beautiful wife, Sarah, would be taken away from him and that he would be killed. His fears were well-founded, but Abraham did not let such concerns sidetrack him from obeying Jehovah. More than once, Jehovah stepped in and protected Abraham and Sarah, even doing so miraculously. (Gen. 12:10-20; 20:2-7, 10-12, 17, 18) Those experiences strengthened Abraham’s faith.</p><p><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Can we build a friendship with Jehovah? We can indeed! The needed knowledge and experience are readily available. Abraham had only a fraction of the abundant riches of wisdom now contained in the Bible. (Dan. 12:4; Rom. 11:33) God’s Word is full of treasures that can deepen our knowledge about the “Maker of heaven and earth” and help us to build respect and love for him. As such feelings move us to obey God, we gain experience because we see how obeying him works out. We find that his counsel protects us and that he blesses and strengthens us. We learn that wholehearted service to God brings fulfillment, peace, and joy. (Ps. 34:8; Prov. 10:22) As we grow in such knowledge and experience, our faith in Jehovah and our friendship with him grow as well.</p><p><strong>HOW ABRAHAM MAINTAINED HIS FRIENDSHIP WITH GOD</strong></p><p><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>A friendship can be a precious treasure. <strong>(Read Proverbs 17:17.) </strong>However, friendship is not like an inanimate thing that we might purchase and then store somewhere to gather dust. Friendship is more like a living thing that needs care and sustenance if it is to thrive and flourish. Abraham cherished and maintained his friendship with Jehovah. How did he do so?</p><p><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Abraham never came to feel that his past record of godly fear and obedience was enough. As he and his large household traveled into Canaan, he continued to let Jehovah guide him in making decisions, from the small to the great. A year before Isaac was born, when Abraham was 99 years old, Jehovah required that all males of Abraham’s household be circumcised. Did Abraham question that command or look for some way out of complying with it? No, he trusted in God and obeyed “on that very day.”<wbr />—Gen. 17:10-14, 23.</p><p><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Because he made it a practice to</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***wp16 pp. 14-15 Chapters and Verses—Who Put Them in the Bible?***</strong></a><br /><strong>Chapters and Verses<wbr />—Who Put Them in the Bible?</strong></p><p>IMAGINE that you are a Christian living in the first century. Your congregation has just received a letter from the apostle Paul. As you listen to it being read, you notice that Paul often quotes from “the holy writings,” that is, the Hebrew Scriptures. (2 Timothy 3:15) ‘I would really like to see the text he is quoting from,’ you say to yourself. But that would not have been easy. Why not?</p><p><strong>NO CHAPTERS OR VERSES</strong></p><p>Consider what the manuscripts of “the holy writings” that were available in Paul’s day looked like. One is shown here<wbr />—a portion of the book of Isaiah from the Dead Sea Scrolls. What do you see? Solid blocks of text! No punctuation. And none of the numbered chapters and verses that we use today.</p><p>Bible writers did not divide their message into chapters or verses. They just wrote down the whole message God gave them so that the readers could also get the whole message, not just tiny parts of it. Is that not what you want when you get an important letter from someone you love? You read the whole letter, not just bits and pieces of it.</p><p>The lack of chapters or verses, however, did pose a problem. Paul could only identify his quotations with such words as “just as it is written” or “just as Isaiah foretold.” (Romans 3:10; 9:29) And it would have been difficult to find those quotations unless you were very familiar with all “the holy writings.”</p><p>Furthermore, those “holy writings” were not one simple message from God. By the end of the first century C.E., they consisted of a collection of 66 separate books! That is why most Bible readers today are glad to have numbered chapters and verses that help them find specific information, such as the many quotations in Paul’s letters.</p><p>‘So,’ you might ask, ‘who put those chapter and verse numbers in the Bible?’</p><p><strong>WHO ADDED THE CHAPTERS?</strong></p><p>English cleric Stephen Langton, who later became Archbishop of Canterbury, is credited with adding the chapter divisions to the Bible. He did this early in the 13th century C.E., when he was a teacher at the University of Paris in France.</p><p>Before Langton’s day, scholars had experimented with different ways of dividing the Bible into smaller sections or chapters, mainly, it seems, for reference purposes. You can imagine how much easier it would have been for them to find a passage if they had to search through only one chapter rather than a whole book, such as the book of Isaiah with its 66 chapters.</p><p>All of that, however, created a problem. The scholars produced many different and incompatible systems. In one of them, Mark’s Gospel was divided into almost 50 chapters, not the 16 we have now. In Paris in Langton’s day, there were students from many countries, and they brought with them Bibles from their native lands. However, lecturers and students could not share references. Why? Because the chapter divisions in their manuscripts simply did not match.</p><p>So Langton developed new chapter divisions. His system “caught the imagination of readers and scribes,” states <em>The Book<wbr />—A History of the Bible, </em>and it “spread rapidly across Europe.” He gave us the chapter numbering we find in most Bibles today.</p><p><strong>WHO ADDED THE VERSES?</strong></p><p>Some 300 years later, in the middle of the 16th century, renowned French printer-scholar Robert Estienne made things even easier. His aim was to popularize Bible study. He realized how valuable it would be to have a uniform system of both numbered chapters <em>and </em>numbered verses.</p><p>Estienne did not come up with the idea of dividing the Bible text into verses. Others had done that already. Centuries earlier, Jewish copyists, for example, had divided the whole Hebrew Bible, or the part of the Bible commonly called the Old Testament, into verses but not into chapters. Again, as with the development of chapters, there was no uniform system.</p><p>Estienne divided the Christian Greek Scriptures, or what is called the New Testament, into a new set of numbered verses and combined them with those already in the Hebrew Bible. In 1553, he published the first complete Bible (an edition in French) with basically the same chapters and verses that most Bibles use today. Some people were critical and said that the verses broke the Bible text into fragments, making it appear as a series of separate and detached statements. But his system was quickly adopted by other printers.</p><p><strong>A BOON FOR BIBLE STUDENTS</strong></p><p>It seems to be such a simple idea<wbr />—numbered chapters and verses. This gives each verse in the Bible a unique “address”<wbr />—like a postal code. True, the chapter and verse divisions are not inspired by God, and they do at times break up the Bible text in strange places. But they make it easier for us to pinpoint quotes and to highlight or share individual verses that may have special meaning for us<wbr />—just as we highlight expressions or phrases that we specially want to remember in a document or a book.</p><p>Convenient though the chapter-and-verse divisions are, always keep in mind the importance of getting the big picture<wbr />—understanding the whole message God gave. Cultivate the habit of reading the context rather than just isolated verses. Doing so will help you to become more and more familiar with all “the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation.”<wbr />—2 Timothy 3:15.</p><p><strong>[Box on page 15]</strong></p><p><strong>How Chapters and Verses Are Designated</strong></p><p>A chapter-and-verse reference lets you know where to find any passage of scripture. In this magazine, the reference “Isaiah 40:13,” for example, identifies the following:</p><p><strong>(a)</strong> the book, Isaiah</p><p><strong>(b)</strong> the chapter, 40</p><p><strong>(c)</strong> the verse, 13</p><p>There, we find Isaiah’s words: “Who has taken the measurements of the spirit of Jehovah, and who can instruct him as his adviser?” Paul’s use of these words can now be found easily at Romans 11:34 and 1 Corinthians 2:16.</p><p><strong>[Picture on pages 14, 15]</strong></p><p><strong>[Credit Line]</strong></p><p>Courtesy of Shrine of the Book, Israel Museum, Jerusalem</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 15]</strong></p><p><strong>a</strong></p><p>ISAIAH</p><p><strong>b</strong></p><p>40 “Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God.</p><p> 2 “Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, And proclaim to her that her compulsory service has been fulfilled, That her guilt has been paid off.”</p><p><strong>c</strong></p><p>13 Who has taken the measurements of the spirit of Jehovah,</p><p>And who can instruct him as his adviser?</p><p>14 With whom did he consult to gain . . .</p><p><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /><wbr /></p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***w16 March p. 31-p. 32 Questions From Readers***</strong></a><br /><strong>Did Satan physically take Jesus to the temple when tempting him?</strong></p><p>▪ Put simply, we cannot be certain whether Jesus actually stood in the temple or he did so only by means of a vision. At times, both possibilities have been presented in our publications.</p><p>Consider first what the Bible record says. In his Gospel account of this event, the apostle Matthew was inspired to write: “Then the Devil <em>took him </em>[Jesus] along into the holy city, and he <em>stationed him </em>on the battlement [“parapet; highest point,” ftn.] of the temple.” (Matt. 4:5) Luke’s parallel account puts it this way: “He then <em>led him </em>into Jerusalem and <em>stationed him </em>on the battlement of the temple.”<wbr />—Luke 4:9.</p><p>In the past, our publications have reasoned that this event may not have happened literally. For example, in the issue of March 1, 1961, <em>The Watchtower </em>explained: “It does not seem reasonable to place a literal construction on all that appears in the account of Jesus’ temptation in the wilderness. Certainly there is no mountain from which one could be shown ‘all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.’ So too, we must reasonably conclude that Satan did not literally, bodily, physically, take Jesus ‘along into the holy city’ and station him ‘upon the battlement of the temple.’ Such was not at all necessary for the temptation to have force.” However, in subsequent issues of this journal, we have observed that Christ’s complying with Satan’s request could have resulted in Jesus’ suicide.</p><p>Some have stated that, as a non-Levite, Jesus was not authorized to stand on top of the temple sanctuary. So it was assumed that Jesus may have been ‘taken along’ to the temple by means of a vision. That is similar to what happened centuries earlier to the prophet Ezekiel.<wbr />—Ezek. 8:3, 7-10; 11:1, 24; 37:1, 2.</p><p>However, if this temptation occurred only in the form of a vision, the following questions arise:</p><p>▪ Was the <em>temptation </em>real or imaginary?</p><p>▪ If the other temptations were efforts to lure Jesus into carrying out physical actions such as turning literal stones into bread or performing a real act of worship before Satan, would not this temptation have been similar<wbr />—requiring Jesus physically to jump from the temple?</p><p>On the other hand, if Jesus did stand physically on the battlement of the temple, other questions arise:</p><p>▪ Did Jesus violate the Law by standing on top of the sanctuary?</p><p>▪ How did Jesus get from the wilderness to Jerusalem?</p><p>Further research helps us to see some possibilities that may answer these last two questions.</p><p>First, Professor D. A. Carson notes that the Greek word <em>hi·e·ron’, </em>translated “temple” in both accounts, “probably refers to the entire complex, not the sanctuary itself.” So Jesus would not necessarily have had to stand on top of the sanctuary itself. He could have stood, for example, on the southeastern corner of the temple area. From that location, there was a drop of some 450 feet (137 m) to the floor of the Kidron Valley. The southeast structure had a flat roof with a parapet and was the highest in the temple. The ancient historian Josephus stated that if a person stood there and looked down, he “would become dizzy” because of the height. As a non-Levite, Jesus would have been allowed to stand in that location, and his doing so would not have caused any commotion.</p><p>But how could Jesus have been taken along to the temple when he was in the wilderness? The basic answer is that we cannot know for certain. The brief description of the temptations does not state how long a period was involved or where Jesus was in the wilderness. We cannot rule out the possibility that Jesus may have walked back to Jerusalem, even though doing so may have taken some time. The account does not specifically say that Jesus remained in the wilderness throughout the time of the temptations. Rather, it merely says that he was taken into Jerusalem.</p><p>What, though, of the temptation wherein Jesus was shown “all the kingdoms of the world”? Obviously, he did not literally see all the kingdoms; there is no literal mountain from which all of them can be seen. So Satan may have used some sort of vision to show these to Jesus, similar to the way a projector and a screen can be used to show someone pictures of various places on earth. However, although a vision may have been used, the “act of worship” would have been real, not imaginary. (Matt. 4:8, 9) It could be argued, then, that the temptation to jump off the battlement of the temple involved a real action with real consequences<wbr />—adding a greater seriousness to this temptation than would be the case were it a mere vision.</p><p>The fact is, as stated at the outset, we cannot be dogmatic about this matter. Hence, we cannot rule out the possibility that Jesus actually went to Jerusalem and stood on the battlement of the temple. But one thing we can be sure about is that these temptations were real and that Jesus gave a conclusive answer to the Devil in each case.</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016450.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***w16 April p. 4 Is Your Ministry Like the Dew?***</strong></a><br /><strong>MINISTRY LIKE THE DEW<wbr />—HOW?</strong></p><p><strong>Dew is gentle. </strong>Dew forms gradually, accumulating drop by drop from the water vapor in the air. Jehovah’s words ‘trickled as the dew’ in that he spoke kindly, gently, and considerately to his people. We imitate him when we show respect for another person’s viewpoint. We encourage people to reason for themselves and thus draw their own conclusions. When we show such consideration, our words are more readily absorbed and our ministry is more effective.</p><p><strong>Dew is refreshing. </strong>Our ministry refreshes others when we ponder how best to further their interests. Gavin, mentioned earlier, was not pressured to accept a Bible study. Instead Chris, the brother who initially approached him, explored different ways to make Gavin feel more comfortable discussing the Bible. Chris explained to Gavin that the Bible has a theme and that discerning it would help him better understand the meetings he was attending. Next, Chris revealed that it was Bible prophecy that convinced him personally that the Bible is true. This led to several discussions about the fulfillment of prophecy. Gavin felt refreshed by these conversations and finally accepted a Bible study.</p><p><strong>Dew is life-sustaining. </strong>The land of Israel experiences a hot, dry season during which rain may not fall for several months. Without the moisture provided by dew, plants wither and die. A spiritual drought exists today, just as Jehovah foretold. (Amos 8:11) He promised that anointed evangelizers would be “like dew from Jehovah” as they proclaim the Kingdom message, supported by their companions of the “other sheep.” (Mic. 5:7; John 10:16) Do we value our message of Kingdom good news as part of Jehovah’s provision of life-sustaining spiritual moisture?</p><p><strong>Dew is a blessing from Jehovah. </strong>(Deut. 33:13) Our ministry can be a blessing to those who respond. Gavin received just such a blessing. Through his Bible study, he found answers to all his questions. He quickly progressed to baptism and now, along with his wife, Joyce, enjoys a full share in preaching the Kingdom good news.</p><p><strong>VALUE YOUR MINISTRY</strong></p><p>Thinking about dew can also encourage us to place a high value on our personal share in the ministry. How so? Individual drops of water achieve very little, but the combined effect of millions of dewdrops saturates the earth with moisture. Likewise, our individual share in the ministry may seem very small to us. However, the combined effort of all of Jehovah’s willing ministers contributes to the giving of a witness “to <em>all the nations.” </em>(Matt. 24:14) Will our ministry prove to be a blessing from Jehovah to others? It will when the message we preach is just like dew<wbr />—gentle, refreshing, and life-sustaining!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
