<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 6/16 “Jehovah Our God Is One Jehovah”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016445.xhtml#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 1:1-3:30)</strong> <span id="citation24"></span>In the third year of the kingship of King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah, King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In time Jehovah gave King Je·hoiʹa·kim of Judah into his hand, along with some of the utensils of the house* of the true God, and he brought them to the land of Shiʹnar* to the house* of his god. He placed the utensils in the treasury of his god. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then the king ordered Ashʹpe·naz his chief court official to bring some of the Israelites,* including those of royal and noble descent. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They were to be youths* without any defect, of good appearance, endowed with wisdom, knowledge, and discernment, and capable of serving in the king’s palace. He was to teach them the writing and the language of the Chal·deʹans. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Furthermore, the king assigned to them a daily ration from the king’s delicacies and from the wine he drank. They were to be trained* for three years, and at the end of that time they were to enter the king’s service. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Now among them were some from the tribe* of Judah: Daniel,* Han·a·niʹah,* Mishʹa·el,* and Az·a·riʹah.* <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And the principal court official assigned names* to them; he gave to Daniel the name Bel·te·shazʹzar, to Han·a·niʹah the name Shaʹdrach, to Mishʹa·el the name Meʹshach, and to Az·a·riʹah the name A·bedʹne·go. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But Daniel resolved in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king’s delicacies or with the wine he drank. So he asked the principal court official for permission not to defile himself in this way. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>And the true God caused the principal court official to show Daniel favor* and mercy. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>But the principal court official said to Daniel: “I am afraid of my lord the king, who has assigned your food and drink. What if he should see you looking worse in appearance than the other youths* of your age? You would make me* guilty before the king.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But Daniel said to the guardian whom the principal court official had appointed over Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah: <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>“Please, test your servants for ten days, and let us be given some vegetables to eat and water to drink; <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>then compare our appearance with the appearance of the youths* who are eating the king’s delicacies, and deal with your servants according to what you see.” <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>So he agreed to their proposal and tested them for ten days. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>At the end of ten days their appearance was better and healthier* than all the youths* who were eating the king’s delicacies. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>So the guardian would take away their delicacies and their wine and give them vegetables. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And the true God gave these four youths* knowledge and insight into every kind of writing and wisdom; and Daniel was given understanding in all sorts of visions and dreams. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>At the end of the time that the king had specified to bring them in, the principal court official brought them in before Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When the king spoke with them, no one in the entire group was found to be like Daniel, Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah; and they continued to serve before the king. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>In every matter requiring wisdom and understanding that the king would ask them about, he found them ten times better than all the magic-practicing priests and the conjurers in his entire realm. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>And Daniel remained there until the first year of King Cyrus. </p><p><strong>2 </strong>In the second year of his kingship, Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had a number of dreams, and he* was so agitated that he could not sleep. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So the king gave the order to summon the magic-practicing priests, the conjurers, the sorcerers, and the Chal·deʹans* to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Then the king said to them: “I have had a dream, and I am* agitated because I want to know what I dreamed.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The Chal·deʹans replied to the king in the Ar·a·maʹic language:* “O king, may you live on forever. Relate the dream to your servants, and we will tell the interpretation.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The king answered the Chal·deʹans: “This is my final word: If you do not make the dream known to me, along with its interpretation, you will be dismembered, and your houses will be turned into public latrines.* <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>But if you do tell the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts and a reward and great honor. So tell me the dream and its interpretation.” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They answered a second time: “Let the king relate the dream to his servants, and we will tell its interpretation.” <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The king replied: “I am well-aware that you are trying to gain time, for you realize what my final word is. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If you do not make the dream known to me, there is only one penalty for all of you. But you have agreed to tell me something false and deceitful until the situation changes. So tell me the dream, and I will know that you can explain its interpretation.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The Chal·deʹans answered the king: “There is not a man on earth* who is able to do what the king demands, for no great king or governor has asked such a thing of any magic-practicing priest or conjurer or Chal·deʹan. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>What the king is asking is difficult, and no one exists who could tell the king this except the gods, who do not dwell among mortals.”* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>At this the king flew into a violent rage and gave the order to destroy all the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>When the order was issued and the wise men were about to be killed, they also looked for Daniel and his companions to put them to death. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>At that time Daniel discreetly and cautiously spoke to Arʹi·och the chief of the king’s bodyguard, who had gone out to kill the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He asked Arʹi·och the officer of the king: “Why is there such a harsh order from the king?” Then Arʹi·och informed Daniel about the matter. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>So Daniel went in and asked the king to grant him time to tell the interpretation to the king. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Daniel then went to his house and informed his companions Han·a·niʹah, Mishʹa·el, and Az·a·riʹah of the matter. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>He asked them to pray for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this secret, so that Daniel and his companions would not be destroyed along with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Then the secret was revealed to Daniel in a vision at night. So Daniel praised the God of heaven. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Daniel declared: “Let the name of God be praised for all eternity,* For wisdom and mightiness are his alone. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>He changes times and seasons, Removes kings and sets up kings, Gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those with discernment. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>He reveals the deep things and the hidden things, He knows what is in the darkness, And with him the light dwells. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>To you, O God of my forefathers, I offer thanks and praise, Because you have given me wisdom and power. And now you have made known to me what we requested of you; You have made known to us the concern of the king.” <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Daniel then went in to Arʹi·och, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon, and he said to him: “Do not destroy any wise men of Babylon. Take me in before the king, and I will tell the interpretation to the king.” <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Arʹi·och quickly took Daniel in before the king and said to him: “I have found a man of the exiles of Judah who can make known the interpretation to the king.” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The king said to Daniel, whose name was Bel·te·shazʹzar: “Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw, and its interpretation?” <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Daniel replied to the king: “None of the wise men, conjurers, magic-practicing priests, or astrologers are able to tell the king the secret that he is asking. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But there is a God in the heavens who is a Revealer of secrets, and he has made known to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar what is to happen in the final part of the days. This is your dream, and these are the visions of your head as you lay on your bed: <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>“As for you, O king, on your bed your thoughts turned to what is to take place in the future, and the Revealer of secrets has made known to you what is to happen. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>As for me, this secret was not revealed to me because I have greater wisdom than anyone living; rather, it was to make the interpretation known to the king so that you may know the thoughts in your heart. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“You, O king, were watching, and you saw an immense image.* That image, which was huge and extremely bright, was standing in front of you, and its appearance was terrifying. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The head of that image was of fine gold, its chest and its arms were of silver, its abdomen and its thighs were of copper, <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>its legs were of iron, and its feet were partly of iron and partly of clay.* <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>You looked on until a stone was cut out, not by hands, and it struck the image on its feet of iron and of clay and crushed them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>At that time the iron, the clay, the copper, the silver, and the gold were, all together, crushed and became like the chaff from the summer threshing floor, and the wind carried them away so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a large mountain, and it filled the whole earth. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“This is the dream, and we will now tell the king its interpretation. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>You, O king—the king of kings to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the might, the strength, and the glory, <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>and into whose hand he has given men wherever they may dwell, as well as the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens, and whom he has made ruler over all of them—you yourself are the head of gold. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>“But after you another kingdom will rise, inferior to you; then another kingdom, a third one, of copper, that will rule over the whole earth. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>“As for the fourth kingdom, it will be strong like iron. For just as iron crushes and pulverizes everything else, yes, like iron that shatters, it will crush and shatter all of these. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>“And just as you saw the feet and the toes to be partly of clay of a potter and partly of iron, the kingdom will be divided, but some of the hardness of iron will be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with soft clay. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Just as you saw iron mixed with soft clay, they will be mixed with the people;* but they will not stick together, one to the other, just as iron does not mix with clay. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>“In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever, <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>just as you saw that out of the mountain a stone was cut not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the copper, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The Grand God has made known to the king what will happen in the future. The dream is true, and its interpretation is trustworthy.” <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar fell down with his face to the ground before Daniel and paid homage to him. And he gave the order to offer a present and incense to him. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>The king said to Daniel: “Truly your God is a God of gods and a Lord of kings and a Revealer of secrets, because you were able to reveal this secret.” <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>The king then elevated Daniel and gave him many fine gifts, and he made him the ruler over all the province* of Babylon and the chief prefect over all the wise men of Babylon. <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>And at Daniel’s request, the king appointed Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go over the administration of the province* of Babylon, but Daniel served in the king’s court. </p><p><strong>3 </strong>Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar the king made an image* of gold that was 60 cubits* high and 6 cubits* wide. He set it up on the plain of Duʹra in the province* of Babylon. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Then King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar sent word to assemble the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the administrators of the provinces* to come to the inauguration of the image that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>So the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the administrators of the provinces* assembled for the inauguration of the image that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up. And they stood in front of the image that Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>The herald loudly proclaimed: “You are commanded, O peoples, nations, and language groups, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>that when you hear the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments, you must fall down and worship the image of gold that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar has set up. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Whoever does not fall down and worship will immediately be thrown into the burning fiery furnace.” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>So when all the peoples heard the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, and all the other musical instruments, all the peoples, nations, and language groups fell down and worshipped the image of gold that King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar had set up. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Now at that time some of the Chal·deʹans came forward and accused* the Jews. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They said to King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar: “O king, may you live on forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You, O king, gave the command that every man who hears the sound of the horn, pipe, zither, triangular harp, stringed instrument, bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments should fall down and worship the image of gold; <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>and that whoever would not fall down and worship should be thrown into the burning fiery furnace. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But there are certain Jews whom you appointed to administer the province* of Babylon: Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go. These men have paid no regard to you, O king. They are not serving your gods, and they refuse to worship the image of gold that you have set up.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Then Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, in a furious rage, ordered Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go to be brought in. So these men were brought in before the king. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar said to them: “Is it really true, Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, that you are not serving my gods and that you refuse to worship the image of gold that I have set up? <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Now when you hear the sound of the horn, the pipe, the zither, the triangular harp, the stringed instrument, the bagpipe, and all the other musical instruments, if you are ready to fall down and worship the image that I have made, fine. But if you refuse to worship, you will immediately be thrown into the burning fiery furnace. And who is the god who can rescue you out of my hands?” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go answered the king: “O Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>If it must be, our God whom we serve is able to rescue us from the burning fiery furnace, O king, and to rescue us from your hand. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But even if he does not, let it be known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of gold that you have set up.” <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Then Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar became so furious with Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go that the expression of his face changed* toward them, and he gave orders to heat the furnace seven times hotter than usual. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He ordered some of the mighty men from his army to bind Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go and to throw them into the burning fiery furnace. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>So these men were tied up while still wearing their cloaks, garments, caps, and all their other clothing, and they were thrown into the burning fiery furnace. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Because the king’s command was so harsh and the furnace was exceptionally hot, the men who took up Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go were the ones killed by the flames of the fire. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>But these three men, Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, fell bound into the burning fiery furnace. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar then became frightened and quickly rose up and said to his high officials: “Did we not tie up three men and throw them into the fire?” They answered the king: “Yes, O king.” <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>He said: “Look! I see four men walking about free in the midst of the fire, and they are unharmed, and the fourth one looks like a son of the gods.” <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar approached the door of the burning fiery furnace and said: “Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, you servants of the Most High God, step out and come here!” Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go stepped out from the midst of the fire. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And the satraps, prefects, governors, and the high officials of the king who were assembled there saw that the fire had had no effect on* the bodies of these men; not a hair of their heads had been singed, their cloaks looked no different, and there was not even the smell of fire on them. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar then declared: “Praised be the God of Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go, who sent his angel and rescued his servants. They trusted in him and went against the command of the king and were willing to die* rather than serve or worship any god except their own God. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>I am therefore issuing an order that any people, nation, or language group that says anything against the God of Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go should be dismembered, and their houses should be turned into public latrines;* for there is no other god who is able to rescue like this one.” <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The king then promoted* Shaʹdrach, Meʹshach, and A·bedʹne·go in the province* of Babylon.</p><p></p><p>Or “temple.”</p><p>That is, Babylonia.</p><p>Or “temple.”</p><p>Lit., “sons of Israel.”</p><p>Lit., “children.”</p><p>Or possibly, “nourished.”</p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p><p>Meaning “My Judge Is God.”</p><p>Meaning “Jehovah Has Shown Favor.”</p><p>Possibly meaning “Who Is Like God?”</p><p>Meaning “Jehovah Has Helped.”</p><p>That is, Babylonian names.</p><p>Or “kindness.”</p><p>Lit., “children.”</p><p>Lit., “my head.”</p><p>Lit., “children.”</p><p>Lit., “fat of flesh.”</p><p>Lit., “children.”</p><p>Lit., “children.”</p><p>Lit., “his spirit.”</p><p>That is, a group skilled in divination and astrology.</p><p>Lit., “my spirit is.”</p><p>Da 2:4b through 7:28 was originally written in Aramaic.</p><p>Or possibly, “garbage dumps; dunghills.”</p><p>Or “dry land.”</p><p>Lit., “with flesh.”</p><p>Or “from eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “statue.”</p><p>Or “baked (molded) clay.”</p><p>Or “the offspring of mankind,” that is, the common people.</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p><p>Or “statue.”</p><p>About 27 m (88 ft). See App. B14.</p><p>About 2.7 m (8.8 ft). See App. B14.</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p><p>Or “jurisdictional districts.”</p><p>Or “jurisdictional districts.”</p><p>Or “slandered.”</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p><p>Or “that his attitude changed completely.”</p><p>Or “power over.”</p><p>Or “and gave up their bodies.”</p><p>Or possibly, “garbage dumps; dunghills.”</p><p>Lit., “caused to prosper.”</p><p>Or “jurisdictional district.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016445.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***snnw song 138 Jehovah Is Your Name***</strong></a><br />Song 138</p><p><strong>Jehovah Is Your Name</strong></p><p><strong>Download:</strong></p><p>• Lyrics Only</p><p>• Lead Sheet</p><p>(Psalm 83:18)</p><p>1. The living and true God—</p><p>The God of all creation</p><p>In ev’ry generation—</p><p>Jehovah is your name.</p><p>We’re honored and we’re proud</p><p>To be your congregation.</p><p>In ev’ry tribe and nation,</p><p>Your glory we proclaim.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Jehovah, Jehovah,</p><p>There is no God like you.</p><p>There’s no other in the heavens</p><p>Or on the earth below.</p><p>You alone are God Almighty,</p><p>And this all men must know.</p><p>Jehovah, Jehovah,</p><p>We have no other God but you.</p><p>2. You cause us to become</p><p>Whatever you desire,</p><p>To do as you require—</p><p>Jehovah is your name.</p><p>And Witnesses for you</p><p>Is what you’ve kindly named us.</p><p>We’re honored you have claimed us—</p><p>A people for your name.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Jehovah, Jehovah,</p><p>There is no God like you.</p><p>There’s no other in the heavens</p><p>Or on the earth below.</p><p>You alone are God Almighty,</p><p>And this all men must know.</p><p>Jehovah, Jehovah,</p><p>We have no other God but you.</p><p>(See also 2 Chron. 6:14; Ps. 72:19; Isa. 42:8.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016445.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 112 Great God, Jehovah***</strong></a><br />Song 112</p><p><strong>Great God, Jehovah</strong></p><p>(Exodus 34:6, 7)</p><p>1. Great God, Jehovah, you are deserving,</p><p>Worthy of the highest praise,</p><p>Good and just in all your ways.</p><p>Your throne is founded firmly on justice;</p><p>You are God to endless days.</p><p>2. Pardoning error, sin, and transgression,</p><p>Merciful to those like you,</p><p>Those who practice mercy too.</p><p>Your kingly justice, your loving-kindness,</p><p>You have shown in all you do.</p><p>3. Let men and angels join in your praises;</p><p>Let your name be sanctified,</p><p>Never more to be denied.</p><p>Soon may your Kingdom, ruling in heaven,</p><p>Make your will be done earth wide.</p><p>(See also Deut. 32:4; Prov. 16:12; Matt. 6:10; Rev. 4:11.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
