<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 6/16 Questions From Readers</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016444.xhtml#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Rev. 19:11-21)</strong></a> <span id="citation14"></span>I saw heaven opened, and look! a white horse. And the one seated on it is called Faithful and True, and he judges and carries on war in righteousness. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>His eyes are a fiery flame, and on his head are many diadems.* He has a name written that no one knows but he himself, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>and he is clothed with an outer garment stained* with blood, and he is called by the name The Word of God. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Also, the armies in heaven were following him on white horses, and they were clothed in white, clean, fine linen. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And out of his mouth protrudes a sharp, long sword with which to strike the nations, and he will shepherd them with a rod of iron. Moreover, he treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>On his outer garment, yes, on his thigh, he has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I saw also an angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice and said to all the birds that fly in midheaven:* “Come here, be gathered together to the great evening meal of God, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>so that you may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of military commanders and the flesh of strong men and the flesh of horses and of those seated on them, and the flesh of all, of freemen as well as of slaves and of small ones and great.” <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>And I saw the wild beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the one seated on the horse and against his army. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>And the wild beast was caught, and along with it the false prophet that performed in front of it the signs with which he misled those who received the mark of the wild beast and those who worship its image. While still alive, they both were hurled into the fiery lake that burns with sulfur. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But the rest were killed off with the long sword that proceeded out of the mouth of the one seated on the horse. And all the birds were filled with their flesh.</p><p></p><p>Or “royal headbands.”</p><p>Or possibly, “sprinkled.”</p><p>Or “in midair; overhead.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016444.xhtml#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Jer. 35:1-19)</strong></a> <span id="citation18"></span>The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Je·hoiʹa·kim son of Jo·siʹah, the king of Judah, saying: <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Go to the house of the Reʹcha·bites and speak with them and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the dining rooms;* then offer them wine to drink.” <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>So I took Ja·az·a·niʹah the son of Jeremiah the son of Hab·az·zi·niʹah, his brothers, all his sons, and the entire house of the Reʹcha·bites <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>into the house of Jehovah. I brought them to the dining room of the sons of Haʹnan the son of Ig·da·liʹah, a man of the true God, which was next to the dining room of the princes that was above the dining room of Ma·a·seiʹah the son of Shalʹlum the doorkeeper. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then I put cups and goblets full of wine before the men of the house of the Reʹcha·bites and said to them: “Drink wine.” <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>But they said: “We will not drink wine, because Je·honʹa·dab* the son of Reʹchab, our forefather, gave us this command, ‘Neither you nor your sons must ever drink wine. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And you must not build a house, sow seed, or plant or obtain a vineyard. Instead, you must always dwell in tents, so that you may live for a long time in the land where you are residing as foreigners.’ <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>So we continue to obey the voice of Je·honʹa·dab the son of our forefather Reʹchab in all that he commanded us, by never drinking any wine—we, our wives, our sons, and our daughters. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>And we do not build houses to dwell in, nor do we have vineyards or fields or seed. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>We keep living in tents and obeying all that Je·honʹa·dab* our forefather commanded us. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But when King Neb·u·chad·nezʹzar* of Babylon came up against the land, we said, ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the army of the Chal·deʹans and of the Syrians,’ and now we are living in Jerusalem.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying: <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go and say to the men of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: “Were you not continually urged to obey my words?” declares Jehovah. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab commanded his descendants not to drink wine, and they have carried out his words by not drinking it to this day, thus obeying the order of their forefather. However, I have spoken to you again and again,* but you have not obeyed me. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>And I kept sending all my servants the prophets to you, sending them again and again,* saying, ‘Turn back, please, each of you from your evil ways, and do what is right! Do not walk after other gods and serve them. Then you will keep dwelling in the land that I gave to you and your forefathers.’ But you did not incline your ear or listen to me. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The descendants of Je·honʹa·dab the son of Reʹchab have carried out the order that their forefather gave them, but these people have not listened to me.”’” <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“Therefore this is what Jehovah, the God of armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Here I am bringing on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the calamity that I have warned them about, for I have spoken to them, but they would not listen, and I kept calling to them, but they would not answer.’” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>And Jeremiah said to the household of the Reʹcha·bites: “This is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Because you have obeyed the order of your forefather Je·honʹa·dab and you continue to observe all his orders, doing exactly what he ordered you, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>this is what Jehovah of armies, the God of Israel, says: “There will never fail to be a descendant of Je·honʹa·dab* the son of Reʹchab to serve in my presence.”’”</p><p></p><p>Or “the chambers.”</p><p>Lit., “Jonadab,” the shortened form of Jehonadab.</p><p>Lit., “Jonadab,” the shortened form of Jehonadab.</p><p>Lit., “Nebuchadrezzar,” a variant spelling.</p><p>Lit., “rising up early and speaking.”</p><p>Lit., “rising up early and sending.”</p><p>Lit., “Jonadab,” the shortened form of Jehonadab.</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
