<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 6/16 Appreciating Jehovah as Our Potter</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="2016442.xhtml#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> <strong>(2 Sam. 12:1-13)</strong> <span id="citation36"></span>So Jehovah sent Nathan to David. He came in to him and said: “There were two men in one city, the one rich and the other poor. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The rich man had very many sheep and cattle; <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>but the poor man had nothing but one small female lamb, which he had bought. He cared for it, and it grew up together with him and his sons. It would eat from the little food he had and drink from his cup and sleep in his arms. It became as a daughter to him. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Later a visitor came to the rich man, but he would not take any of his own sheep and cattle to prepare a meal for the traveler who had come to him. Instead, he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>At this David grew very angry against the man, and he said to Nathan: “As surely as Jehovah is living, the man who did this deserves to die! <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>And he should pay for the lamb four times over, because he did this and showed no compassion.” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then Nathan said to David: “You are the man! This is what Jehovah the God of Israel says: ‘I myself anointed you as king over Israel, and I rescued you from the hand of Saul. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I was willing to give you your master’s house and put your master’s wives in your arms, and I gave you the house of Israel and of Judah. And as if that were not enough, I was willing to do much more for you. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Why did you despise the word of Jehovah by doing what is bad in his eyes? You struck down U·riʹah the Hitʹtite with the sword! Then you took his wife as your wife after you killed him by the sword of the Amʹmon·ites. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Now a sword will never depart from your own house, because you despised me by taking the wife of U·riʹah the Hitʹtite as your wife.’ <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>This is what Jehovah says: ‘Here I am bringing against you calamity from within your own house; and before your own eyes, I will take your wives and give them to another man,* and he will lie down with your wives in broad daylight.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Although you acted in secret, I will do this in front of all Israel and in broad daylight.’”* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>David then said to Nathan: “I have sinned against Jehovah.” Nathan replied to David: “Jehovah, in turn, forgives your sin.* You will not die.</p><p></p><p>Or “to your fellow man.”</p><p>Lit., “to the eyes of this sun.”</p><p>Lit., “before the sun.”</p><p>Or “lets your sin pass by.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016442.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 89 Jehovah’s Warm Appeal: “Be Wise, My Son”***</strong></a><br />Song 89</p><p><strong>Jehovah’s Warm Appeal: “Be Wise, My Son”</strong></p><p>(Proverbs 27:11)</p><p>1. Young man and young woman,</p><p>do give your heart to me.</p><p>My foe who now taunts me</p><p>will then be made to see.</p><p>Your youth and devotion</p><p>to me you freely give;</p><p>You show all the world</p><p>that for me you really live.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Beloved son and precious daughter,</p><p>Be wise and make my heart rejoice.</p><p>That out of your own heart you serve me,</p><p>And furnish praise by your own choice.</p><p>2. Rejoice and take pleasure</p><p>in giving me your all,</p><p>And though you may stumble,</p><p>I’ll raise you if you fall.</p><p>No matter who fails you</p><p>or proves to be untrue,</p><p>Take comfort in knowing</p><p>I’ll always cherish you.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>Beloved son and precious daughter,</p><p>Be wise and make my heart rejoice.</p><p>That out of your own heart you serve me,</p><p>And furnish praise by your own choice.</p><p>(See also Deut. 6:5; Eccl. 11:9; Isa. 41:13.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016442.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 26 Oh, Walk With God!***</strong></a><br />Song 26</p><p><strong>Oh, Walk With God!</strong></p><p>(Micah 6:8)</p><p>1. Oh, walk with God in modesty;</p><p>Love kindness, and be true.</p><p>With God keep your integrity;</p><p>Let him your strength renew.</p><p>If you would keep his truth so grand,</p><p>By men be not beguiled;</p><p>But let God lead you by the hand,</p><p>Just as a little child.</p><p>2. Oh, walk with God in purity;</p><p>Relapse not into sin.</p><p>Advance to full maturity,</p><p>And his approval win.</p><p>And on whatever things are pure</p><p>And lovely, true, and just,</p><p>On these things think; and to endure,</p><p>In God put all your trust.</p><p>3. Oh, walk with God in faithfulness,</p><p>For then you will attain</p><p>Contentment true and godliness,</p><p>Which are the greatest gain.</p><p>Oh, walk with God; be ever glad</p><p>His glorious praise to sing.</p><p>The greatest joy that can be had,</p><p>His Kingdom work will bring.</p><p>(See also Gen. 5:24; 6:9; Phil. 4:8; 1 Tim. 6:6-8.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
