<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 6/16 Do You Let the Great Potter Mold You?</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016443.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 60 He Will Make You Strong***</strong></a><br />Song 60</p><p><strong>He Will Make You Strong</strong></p><p>(1 Peter 5:10)</p><p>1. There was a reason why God brought the truth to you</p><p>And called you from the darkness to the light.</p><p>Within your heart, he saw the yearning you then had</p><p>To search for him and practice what is right.</p><p>You promised him in prayer to do his will;</p><p>He helped you then, and he will help you still.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>With Jesus’ blood He bought you, to God you now belong.</p><p>So he will make you firm, and he will make you strong.</p><p>He’ll guide you and protect you, as he has all along.</p><p>Yes, he will make you firm, and he will make you strong.</p><p>2. God gave his own beloved Son in your behalf;</p><p>On this account, He wants you to succeed.</p><p>If He did not withhold the gift of His dear Son,</p><p>Then never doubt He’ll give the strength you need.</p><p>He won’t forget the faith and love you’ve shown;</p><p>He will not fail to care for all His own.</p><p>(CHORUS)</p><p>With Jesus’ blood He bought you, to God you now belong.</p><p>So he will make you firm, and he will make you strong.</p><p>He’ll guide you and protect you, as he has all along.</p><p>Yes, he will make you firm, and he will make you strong.</p><p>(See also Rom. 8:32; 14:8, 9; Heb. 6:10; 1 Pet. 2:9.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016443.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***sn song 22 “Jehovah Is My Shepherd”***</strong></a><br />Song 22</p><p><strong>“Jehovah Is My Shepherd”</strong></p><p>(Psalm 23)</p><p>1. Jehovah God is my Shepherd;</p><p>So why should I fear or fret?</p><p>For he who cares for his sheep so much</p><p>Will none of his own forget.</p><p>By quiet waters he leads me,</p><p>My soul does restore and bless.</p><p>He guides my steps for his own name’s sake</p><p>In pathways of righteousness.</p><p>He guides my steps for his own name’s sake</p><p>In pathways of righteousness.</p><p>2. Alone in depths of deep shadow,</p><p>I walk, yet I fear no harm.</p><p>For my Great Shepherd is always near;</p><p>His staff keeps me from alarm.</p><p>My head with oil he refreshes;</p><p>My cup he has filled up well.</p><p>His loving-kindness will follow me,</p><p>And there in his house I’ll dwell.</p><p>His loving-kindness will follow me,</p><p>And there in his house I’ll dwell.</p><p>3. How wise and loving my Shepherd!</p><p>His praises with joy I sing.</p><p>The cheering news of his tender care</p><p>To sheeplike ones I will bring.</p><p>His Word I’ll faithfully follow,</p><p>Walk carefully in his way.</p><p>My glorious treasure of serving him,</p><p>I’ll gratefully use each day.</p><p>My glorious treasure of serving him,</p><p>I’ll gratefully use each day.</p><p>(See also Ps. 28:9; 80:1.)</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016443.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w92 11/15 pp. 13-18 Jehovah Is Not to Blame***</strong></a><br /><strong>Jehovah Is Not to Blame</strong></p><p>“As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those fearing him. For he himself well knows the formation of us, remembering that we are dust.”<wbr />—PSALM 103:13, 14.</p><p>JEHOVAH is not responsible for hardships we may experience because of our mistakes. In this regard consider what happened some 3,900 years ago. God’s friend Abraham (Abram) and his nephew Lot had become very prosperous. (James 2:23) In fact, their possessions and livestock were so plentiful that ‘the land did not allow them to dwell together.’ Moreover, a quarrel arose between the herders of the two men. (Genesis 13:5-7) What could be done about this?</p><p><sup>2 </sup>To end the quarreling, Abraham suggested that a separation take place, and he let Lot have the first choice. Though Abraham was the older man and it would have been appropriate for his nephew to let him take the best area, Lot selected the choicest region<wbr />—the whole well-watered district of the Lower Jordan. Outward appearances were deceptive, for nearby were the morally decadent cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. Lot and his family eventually moved into Sodom, and this put them in spiritual peril. Furthermore, they were taken captive when King Chedorlaomer and his allies defeated the ruler of Sodom. Abraham and his men rescued them, but Lot and his family returned to Sodom.<wbr />—Genesis 13:8-13; 14:4-16.</p><p><sup>3 </sup>Because of the sexual perversion and moral degradation of Sodom and Gomorrah, Jehovah decided to destroy those cities. He mercifully sent two angels who led Lot, his wife, and their two daughters out of Sodom. They were not to look back, but Lot’s wife did so, perhaps longing for the material things left behind. At that, she became a pillar of salt.<wbr />—Genesis 19:1-26.</p><p><sup>4 </sup>What losses Lot and his daughters sustained! The girls had to leave behind men they were going to marry. Lot was now without his wife and his material wealth. In fact, he was eventually reduced to living in a cave with his daughters. (Genesis 19:30-38) What had looked so good to him had turned out to be just the opposite. Even though he had obviously made some serious mistakes, he was later called “righteous Lot.” (2 Peter 2:7, 8) And surely Jehovah God was not to blame for Lot’s mistakes.</p><p><strong>“Mistakes<wbr />—Who Can Discern?”</strong></p><p><sup>5 </sup>Being imperfect and sinful, all of us make mistakes. (Romans 5:12; James 3:2) Like Lot, we may be deceived by outward appearances and may err in judgment. Thus, the psalmist David pleaded: “Mistakes<wbr />—who can discern? From concealed sins pronounce me innocent. Also from presumptuous acts hold your servant back; do not let them dominate me. In that case I shall be complete, and I shall have remained innocent from much transgression.” (Psalm 19:12, 13) David knew that he might commit sins of which he was not even aware. Hence, he asked to be forgiven the transgressions that might have been hidden even from him. When he made a serious mistake because his imperfect flesh prodded him to take a wrong course, he greatly desired Jehovah’s help. He wanted God to restrain him from presumptuous deeds. David did not want presumptuousness to become his dominant attitude. Rather, he desired to be complete in his devotion to Jehovah God.</p><p><sup>6 </sup>As Jehovah’s present-day dedicated servants, we also are imperfect and therefore make mistakes. Like Lot, for instance, we may make a bad choice as to our place of residence. Perhaps we pass up an opportunity to expand our sacred service to God. Though Jehovah sees such mistakes, he knows those who have a heart inclined toward righteousness. Even if we sin seriously but are repentant, Jehovah provides forgiveness and help and continues to view us as godly individuals. “He has not done to us even according to our sins; nor according to our errors has he brought upon us what we deserve,” declared David. “For as the heavens are higher than the earth, his loving-kindness is superior toward those fearing him. As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset, so far off from us he has put our transgressions. As a father shows mercy to his sons, Jehovah has shown mercy to those fearing him. For he himself well knows the formation of us, remembering that we are dust.” (Psalm 103:10-14) Our merciful heavenly Father may also enable us to make amends for our error or may grant us another opportunity to expand our sacred service, to his praise.</p><p><strong>The Error of Blaming God</strong></p><p><sup>7 </sup>When things go wrong, it is a human tendency to blame someone or something for what has happened. Some even blame God. But Jehovah does not bring such hardships on people. He does good, not harmful things. Why, “he makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous”! (Matthew 5:45) A foremost reason why we suffer adversities is that we live in a world that functions on selfish principles and that rests in the power of Satan the Devil.<wbr />—1 John 5:19.</p><p><sup>8 </sup>Blaming Jehovah God for the hardships that our mistakes bring upon us is unwise and dangerous. Doing so can even cost us our very life. The first man, Adam, should have given God credit for all the good things he received. Yes, Adam should have been deeply grateful to Jehovah for life itself and for the blessings he enjoyed in a parklike home, the garden of Eden. (Genesis 2:7-9) What did Adam do when things did not go right because he disobeyed Jehovah and ate the forbidden fruit? Adam complained to God: “The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree and so I ate.” (Genesis 2:15-17; 3:1-12) Surely, we should not blame Jehovah, as Adam did.</p><p><sup>9 </sup>If we encounter hardships because our actions are unwise, we can draw comfort from the knowledge that Jehovah understands our weaknesses better than we do and will deliver us from our plight if we give him exclusive devotion. We should appreciate the divine help we receive, never blaming God for the predicaments and difficulties we bring upon ourselves. In this regard a wise proverb states: “It is the foolishness of an earthling man that distorts his way, and so his heart becomes enraged against Jehovah himself.” (Proverbs 19:3) Another rendering says: “Some people ruin themselves by their own stupid actions and then blame the L<span class="altsize">ORD</span>.” (<em>Today’s English Version</em>) Still another translation states: “A man’s ignorance muddles his affairs and he flies out against Jehovah.”<wbr />—<em>Byington.</em></p><p><sup>10 </sup>In keeping with the principle of this proverb, Adam acted selfishly and his foolish thinking ‘distorted his way.’ His heart turned from Jehovah God, and he set out on his own selfish, independent course. Why, Adam became such an ingrate that he blamed his Creator and thus made himself an enemy of the Most High! Adam’s sin brought his own way and that of his family to ruin. What a warning there is in this! Those inclined to blame Jehovah for undesirable conditions might well ask themselves: Do I give God credit for the good things I enjoy? Am I thankful that I have life as one of his creations? Could it be that my own errors have brought hardship upon me? Do I merit Jehovah’s favor or help because of following his guidance, as set forth in his inspired Word, the Bible?</p><p><strong>A Danger Even for God’s Servants</strong></p><p><sup>11 </sup>The Jewish religious leaders of the first century C.E. claimed to serve God but neglected his word of truth and leaned on their own understanding. (Matthew 15:8, 9) Because Jesus Christ exposed their wrong thinking, they put him to death. Later, they displayed great rage against his disciples. (Acts 7:54-60) So distorted was the way of those men that they actually became enraged against Jehovah himself.<wbr />—Compare Acts 5:34, 38, 39.</p><p><sup>12 </sup>Even some individuals in the Christian congregation have developed dangerous thinking, trying to hold God responsible for the difficulties they have encountered. For example, appointed elders in a certain congregation found it necessary to give one young married woman kind but firm Scriptural counsel against associating with a worldly man. During one discussion, she blamed God for not helping her to withstand the temptation that her continued association with the man brought upon her. She actually said that she was mad at God! Scriptural reasoning and repeated efforts to help her were of no avail, and an immoral course later led to her expulsion from the Christian congregation.</p><p><sup>13 </sup>A complaining spirit can lead a person to blame Jehovah. “Ungodly men” who slipped into the first-century congregation had a bad spirit of that kind, and it was accompanied by other types of spiritually corrupt thinking. As the disciple Jude said, these men were “turning the undeserved kindness of our God into an excuse for loose conduct and proving false to our only Owner and Lord, Jesus Christ.” Jude also stated: “These men are murmurers, complainers about their lot in life.” (Jude 3, 4, 16) Loyal servants of Jehovah will wisely pray that they have an appreciative spirit, not a complaining attitude that might eventually embitter them to the point that they lose faith in God and jeopardize their relationship with him.</p><p><sup>14 </sup>You may feel that this would not happen to you. Yet, things that go wrong because of our mistakes or those of others might ultimately cause us to blame God. For instance, a person may be offended by what a fellow believer says or does. The offended individual<wbr />—perhaps one who has served Jehovah loyally for many years—<wbr />may then say: ‘If that person is in the congregation, I will not attend meetings.’ An individual might become so upset that he says in his heart: ‘If things like this go on, I do not want to be part of the congregation.’ But should a Christian have that attitude? If offended by another imperfect human, why take it out on an entire congregation of people acceptable to God and serving him loyally? Why should anyone who has made a dedication to Jehovah stop doing the divine will and thus take it out on God? How wise is it to let an individual or a set of circumstances destroy one’s good relationship with Jehovah? Surely, it would be foolish and sinful to stop worshiping Jehovah God for any reason.<wbr />—James 4:17.</p><p><sup>15 </sup>Imagine that you were in the same congregation as the loving Christian Gaius. He was “doing a faithful work” in extending hospitality to visiting fellow worshipers<wbr />—and strangers at that! But evidently in the same congregation, there was the proud man Diotrephes. He would accept nothing with respect from John, one of Jesus Christ’s apostles. In fact, Diotrephes even chattered about John with wicked words. The apostle said: “Not being content with these things, neither does [Diotrephes] himself receive the brothers with respect, and those who are wanting to receive them he tries to hinder and to throw out of the congregation.”<wbr />—3 John 1, 5-10.</p><p><sup>16 </sup>If John came to the congregation, he intended to call to remembrance what Diotrephes was doing. Meanwhile, how did Gaius and other hospitable Christians in that congregation react? There is no Scriptural indication that any of them said: ‘As long as Diotrephes is in the congregation, I do not want to be a part of it. You will not see me at the meetings.’ Doubtless Gaius and others like him stood firm. They let nothing cause them to stop doing the divine will, and they certainly did not become enraged against Jehovah. No, indeed, and they did not succumb to the crafty devices of Satan the Devil, who would have rejoiced if they had become unfaithful to Jehovah and had blamed God.<wbr />—Ephesians 6:10-18.</p><p><strong>Never Become Enraged Against Jehovah!</strong></p><p><sup>17 </sup>Even if some individual or situation in a congregation displeased or offended a servant of God, the one taking offense would really be distorting his own way if he stopped associating with Jehovah’s people. Such a person would not be putting his perceptive powers to proper use. (Hebrews 5:14) So be determined to face all adversities as an integrity keeper. Maintain loyalty to Jehovah God, Jesus Christ, and the Christian congregation. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) The truth that leads to eternal life can be found nowhere else.</p><p><sup>18 </sup>Remember, too, that Jehovah never tries anyone with evil things. (James 1:13) God, who is the very epitome of love, does good, especially for those loving him. (1 John 4:8) Though we do not always understand divine dealings, we can be confident that Jehovah God will never fail to do what is best for his servants. As Peter said: “Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; while you throw all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you.” (1 Peter 5:6, 7) Yes, Jehovah really cares for his people.<wbr />—Psalm 94:14.</p><p><sup>19 </sup>Therefore, do not let anything or anybody stumble you. As the psalmist so well said, “abundant peace belongs to those loving [Jehovah God’s] law, and for them there is no stumbling block.” (Psalm 119:165) All of us experience trials, and these may cause us to become somewhat depressed and disheartened at times. But never let bitterness develop in your heart, especially against Jehovah. (Proverbs 4:23) With his help and on a Scriptural basis, handle the problems you can solve and endure those that persist.<wbr />—Matthew 18:15-17; Ephesians 4:26, 27.</p><p><sup>20 </sup>Never let your emotions cause you to react foolishly and thus distort your way. Speak and act in a manner that will make God’s heart rejoice. (Proverbs 27:11) Call upon Jehovah in fervent prayer, knowing that he really cares for you as one of his servants and will give you the understanding needed to remain on the path of life with his people. (Proverbs 3:5, 6) Above all, do not become enraged against God. When things go wrong, always remember that Jehovah is not to blame.</p><p><strong>How Would You Answer?</strong></p><p>□ What mistake did Lot make, but how did God view him?</p><p>□ How did David feel about mistakes and presumptuousness?</p><p>□ When things go wrong, why should we not blame God?</p><p>□ What will help us to avoid becoming enraged against Jehovah?</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p> 1, 2. Who was Abraham, and how did his nephew Lot come to dwell in the wicked city of Sodom?</p><p> 3, 4. What happened to Lot and members of his family when God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah?</p><p> 5. How did David feel about mistakes and presumptuousness?</p><p> 6. What comfort can be drawn from Psalm 103:10-14?</p><p> 7. Why do we suffer adversities?</p><p> 8. What did Adam do when things did not go right for him?</p><p> 9. (a) If we encounter hardships because of our unwise actions, from what can we draw comfort? (b) According to Proverbs 19:3, what do some do when they bring difficulties upon themselves?</p><p>10. How did Adam’s foolishness ‘distort his way’?</p><p>11. As regards God, of what were first-century Jewish religious leaders guilty?</p><p>12. What example shows that even some individuals associated with the Christian congregation try to blame Jehovah for their difficulties?</p><p>13. Why avoid a complaining attitude?</p><p>14. How might one react if offended by a fellow Christian, but why would this not be the proper course?</p><p>15, 16. Of what was Diotrephes guilty, but how did Gaius conduct himself?</p><p>17. How should we act if some individual or situation offends or displeases us?</p><p>18. Though we do not always understand divine dealings, of what can we be sure regarding Jehovah God?</p><p>19, 20. How should we act, even if our trials sometimes depress us?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 15]</strong></p><p>When separating from Abraham, Lot made a poor choice as to his place of residence</p>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="2016443.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w92 11/15 pp. 18-23 Serve Jehovah Loyally***</strong></a><br /><strong>Serve Jehovah Loyally</strong></p><p>“With someone loyal you [Jehovah] will act in loyalty.”<wbr />—2 SAMUEL 22:26.</p><p>JEHOVAH cannot be repaid for all that he does for his people. (Psalm 116:12) How wonderful are his spiritual and material gifts and tender mercy! King David of ancient Israel knew that God also acts in loyalty with those loyal to him. David said so in a song he composed “in the day that Jehovah had delivered him out of the palm of all his enemies and out of [King] Saul’s palm.”<wbr />—2 Samuel 22:1.</p><p><sup>2 </sup>David began his song (paralleling Psalm 18) by praising Jehovah as “the Provider of escape” in answer to prayer. (2 Samuel 22:2-7) From his heavenly temple, God acted to deliver his loyal servant from mighty foes. (2Sa 22 Verses 8-19) David was thus rewarded for pursuing an upright course and keeping Jehovah’s ways. (2Sa 22 Verses 20-27) Enumerated next were deeds done in God-given strength. (2Sa 22 Verses 28-43) Last, David cited deliverance from faultfinders at home and from enemies abroad and gave thanks to Jehovah as “the One doing great acts of salvation for his king and exercising loving-kindness to his anointed one.” (2Sa 22 Verses 44-51) Jehovah can deliver us too if we pursue an upright course and rely on him for strength.</p><p><strong>What It Means to Be Loyal</strong></p><p><sup>3 </sup>David’s song of deliverance gives us this comforting assurance: “With someone loyal you [Jehovah] will act in loyalty.” (2 Samuel 22:26) It is the Hebrew adjective <em>cha·sidhʹ </em>that denotes “someone loyal,” or “one of loving-kindness.” (Psalm 18:25, footnote) The noun <em>cheʹsedh </em>contains the thought of kindness that lovingly attaches itself to an object until its purpose in connection therewith is realized. Jehovah expresses that sort of kindness for his servants, even as they express it for him. This righteous, holy loyalty is rendered “loving-kindness” and “loyal love.” (Genesis 20:13; 21:23) In the Greek Scriptures, “loyalty” carries the idea of holiness and reverence, expressed in the noun <em>ho·si·oʹtes </em>and the adjective <em>hoʹsi·os.</em> Such loyalty includes faithfulness and devotion and means being devout and carefully performing all duties toward God. To be loyal to Jehovah means to stick to him with devotion so strong that it acts like a powerful adhesive.</p><p><sup>4 </sup>Jehovah’s own loyalty is shown in many ways. For example, he takes judicial action against the wicked because of loyal love for his people and loyalty to justice and righteousness. (Revelation 15:3, 4; 16:5) Loyalty to his covenant with Abraham moved him to be long-suffering toward the Israelites. (2 Kings 13:23) Those loyal to God can count on his help to the end of their loyal course and can be sure that he will remember them. (Psalm 37:27, 28; 97:10) Jesus was strengthened by the knowledge that as God’s chief “loyal one,” his soul would not be left in Sheol.<wbr />—Psalm 16:10; Acts 2:25, 27.</p><p><sup>5 </sup>Since Jehovah God is loyal, he requires loyalty of his servants. (Ephesians 4:24) For example, men must be loyal to qualify for appointment as congregation elders. (Titus 1:8) What factors should move Jehovah’s people to serve him loyally?</p><p><strong>Appreciation for the Things Learned</strong></p><p><sup>6 </sup><em>Gratitude for the Scriptural things we have learned should move us to serve Jehovah loyally. </em>The apostle Paul urged Timothy: “Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from what persons you learned them and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through the faith in connection with Christ Jesus.” (2 Timothy 3:14, 15) Remember that such knowledge came from God through “the faithful and discreet slave.”<wbr />—Matthew 24:45-47.</p><p><sup>7 </sup>Especially should appointed elders appreciate the nourishing spiritual food provided by God through the faithful slave. Years ago a few elders lacked such appreciation. One observer noted that these men “were critical of the articles in <em>The Watchtower, </em>not wanting to accept it as . . . God’s channel of truth, always trying to influence others in their way of thinking.” However, loyal elders never try to influence others to reject any of the spiritual food provided by God through the faithful slave.</p><p><sup>8 </sup>As Jehovah’s dedicated Witnesses, all of us must be loyal to him and to his organization. We should never even contemplate turning aside from God’s wonderful light, pursuing an apostate course that can lead to spiritual death now and eventual destruction. (Jeremiah 17:13) But what if it is hard for us to accept or fully appreciate some Scriptural point presented by the faithful slave? Then let us humbly acknowledge where we learned the truth and pray for wisdom to deal with this trial until it comes to an end with some published clarification of matters.<wbr />—James 1:5-8.</p><p><strong>Appreciate the Christian Brotherhood</strong></p><p><sup>9 </sup><em>Heartfelt appreciation for the spirit of fellowship existing within our Christian brotherhood furnishes another incentive to serve Jehovah loyally. </em>In fact, our relationship with God and Christ cannot be spiritually sound without this spirit. The apostle John told anointed Christians: “That which we have seen and heard we are reporting also to you, that you too may be having a sharing [“fellowship,” <em>Diaglott</em>] with us. Furthermore, this sharing of ours is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. . . . If we make the statement: ‘We are having a sharing with him,’ and yet we go on walking in the darkness, we are lying and are not practicing the truth.” (1 John 1:3-6) This principle applies to all Christians, whether their hope is heavenly or earthly.</p><p><sup>10 </sup>Effort is required to maintain a spirit of fellowship. For instance, the Christian women Euodia and Syntyche apparently found it difficult to resolve a problem between them. Paul thus exhorted them “to be of the same mind in the Lord.” He added: “I request you too, genuine yokefellow, keep assisting these women who have striven side by side with me in the good news along with Clement as well as the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.” (Philippians 4:2, 3) Those godly women had fought side by side with Paul and others “in the good news,” and he was sure that they were among those ‘whose names were in the book of life.’</p><p><sup>11 </sup>Christians do not wear an insignia to show what they have been privileged to do in Jehovah’s organization and how they have served him loyally. If they have a spiritual problem, how unloving it would be to ignore their years of loyal service to Jehovah! Likely, the one called “genuine yokefellow” was a loyal brother eager to assist others. If you are an elder, are you a “genuine yokefellow,” ready to give help in a compassionate way? May all of us consider the good done by fellow believers, even as God does, and lovingly help them to bear their burdens.<wbr />—Galatians 6:2; Hebrews 6:10.</p><p><strong>Nowhere Else to Go</strong></p><p><sup>12 </sup><em>We will be impelled to serve Jehovah loyally with his organization if we remember that there is nowhere else to go for life eternal. </em>When Jesus’ statements caused ‘many disciples to go off to the things behind,’ he asked his apostles: “You do not want to go also, do you?” Peter replied: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life; and we have believed and come to know that you are the Holy One of God.”<wbr />—John 6:66-69.</p><p><sup>13 </sup>“Sayings of everlasting life” were not found in Judaism of the first century C.E. Its principal sin was the rejection of Jesus as the Messiah. In none of its forms was Judaism based exclusively on the Hebrew Scriptures. The Sadducees denied the existence of angels and did not believe in the resurrection. Though the Pharisees disagreed with them in these respects, they sinfully made God’s Word invalid because of their unscriptural traditions. (Matthew 15:1-11; Acts 23:6-9) These traditions enslaved the Jews and made it difficult for many to accept Jesus Christ. (Colossians 2:8) Zeal for ‘the traditions of his fathers’ caused Saul (Paul) in his ignorance to be a vicious persecutor of Christ’s followers.<wbr />—Galatians 1:13, 14, 23.</p><p><sup>14 </sup>Judaism lacked God’s favor, but Jehovah blessed the organization made up of his Son’s followers<wbr />—‘a people zealous for fine works.’ (Titus 2:14) That organization still exists, and of it a longtime Witness of Jehovah said: “If one thing has been most important to me, it has been the matter of keeping close to Jehovah’s visible organization. My early experience taught me how unsound it is to rely on human reasoning. Once my mind had been resolved on that point, I determined to stay by the faithful organization. How else can one get Jehovah’s favor and blessing?” There is nowhere else to go for divine favor and life eternal.</p><p><sup>15 </sup>Our hearts should impel us to cooperate with Jehovah’s organization because we know that it alone is directed by his spirit and is making known his name and purposes. Of course, those shouldering responsibility in it are imperfect. (Romans 5:12) But “Jehovah’s anger got to be hot” against Aaron and Miriam when they found fault with Moses and forgot that he, not they, was entrusted with God-given responsibility. (Numbers 12:7-9) Today, loyal Christians cooperate with “those who are taking the lead” because that is what Jehovah requires. (Hebrews 13:7, 17) Evidence of our loyalty includes attending Christian meetings regularly and making comments that ‘incite others to love and fine works.’<wbr />—Hebrews 10:24, 25.</p><p><strong>Be Upbuilding</strong></p><p><sup>16 </sup><em>A desire to be upbuilding to others should also motivate us to serve Jehovah loyally. </em>Paul wrote: “Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.” (1 Corinthians 8:1) Since a certain kind of knowledge puffed up its possessors, Paul must have meant that love also upbuilds those showing that quality. A book by Professors Weiss and English says: “The person who has the capacity to love is usually loved in return. The capacity to extend good will and consideration into every aspect of life . . . has a marked constructive effect upon the person who extends such feelings as well as upon the person who receives them and thus brings pleasure to both.” By showing love, we upbuild others and ourselves, as is implied by Jesus’ words: “There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.”<wbr />—Acts 20:35.</p><p><sup>17 </sup>At 1 Corinthians 8:1, Paul used the Greek word <em>a·gaʹpe, </em>denoting principled love. It builds up, for it is long-suffering and kind, bears and endures all things, and never fails. This love dispels damaging emotions, such as pride and jealousy. (1 Corinthians 13:4-8) Such love will keep us from complaining about our brothers, who are imperfect even as we are. It will prevent us from becoming like the “ungodly men” who “slipped in” among true Christians of the first century. These men were “disregarding lordship and speaking abusively of glorious ones,” evidently maligning such individuals as anointed Christian overseers who had certain glory conferred upon them. (Jude 3, 4, 8) In loyalty to Jehovah, let us never yield to temptation to do anything similar.</p><p><strong>Resist the Devil!</strong></p><p><sup>18 </sup><em>Knowledge that Satan wants to destroy our unity as God’s people should increase our determination to serve Jehovah loyally. </em>Satan would even like to do away with all of God’s people, and the Devil’s earthly servants sometimes kill true worshipers. But God will not allow Satan to wipe out all of them. Jesus died to “bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death, that is, the Devil.” (Hebrews 2:14) Especially has Satan’s realm for exercising power been limited since his ouster from heaven after Christ became King in 1914. And in Jehovah’s due time, Jesus will destroy Satan and his organization.</p><p><sup>19 </sup>This journal once warned: “If Satan, the devil, can cause disorder among the people of God, can cause them to quarrel and fight among themselves, or to manifest and develop a selfish disposition that would lead to the destruction of love for the brethren, he would thereby succeed in devouring them.” (<em>The Watch Tower, </em>May 1, 1921, page 134) Let us not allow the Devil to destroy our unity, perhaps by inducing us to slander, or fight with, one another. (Leviticus 19:16) May Satan never overreach us in such a way that we personally harm those loyally serving Jehovah or make life more difficult for them. (Compare 2 Corinthians 2:10, 11.) Rather, let us apply Peter’s words: “Keep your senses, be watchful. Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone. But take your stand against him, solid in the faith.” (1 Peter 5:8, 9) By taking a firm stand against Satan, we can maintain our blessed unity as Jehovah’s people.<wbr />—Psalm 133:1-3.</p><p><strong>Prayerfully Rely on God</strong></p><p><sup>20 </sup><em>Prayerful reliance on God will help us to continue serving Jehovah loyally. </em>When we see that he is answering our prayers, we are drawn ever closer to him. Prayerful reliance on Jehovah God was urged when the apostle Paul wrote: “I desire that in every place the men carry on prayer, lifting up loyal hands, apart from wrath and debates.” (1 Timothy 2:8) For instance, how important it is that elders prayerfully rely on God! Such a display of loyalty to Jehovah when meeting to discuss congregation matters will help to prevent endless debates and possible outbursts of wrath.</p><p><sup>21 </sup>Prayerful reliance on Jehovah God helps us to care for privileges in his service. A man who had served Jehovah loyally for decades could say: “Our willing acceptance of any assignment given us in God’s worldwide organization, and our remaining at our post of duty, unmovable, bring God’s smile of approval upon our earnest efforts. Even if the task assigned should appear to be menial, it often turns out that without its faithful execution many other vital services could not be performed. Thus if we are humble and directly interested in glorifying Jehovah’s name and not our own, then we can be sure that we shall always be ‘steadfast, unmovable, having plenty to do in Jehovah’s work.’”<wbr />—1 Corinthians 15:58.</p><p><sup>22 </sup>Regardless of what we do in Jehovah’s service, of course, we cannot repay him for what he does for us. How secure we are in God’s organization, surrounded by those who are his friends! (James 2:23) Jehovah has blessed us with unity springing from brotherly love so deep-rooted that Satan himself cannot uproot it. Let us therefore stick to our loyal heavenly Father and work together as his people. Now and for all eternity, let us serve Jehovah loyally.</p><p><strong>How Would You Answer?</strong></p><p>□ What does it mean to be loyal?</p><p>□ What are some factors that should move us to serve Jehovah loyally?</p><p>□ Why must we resist the Devil?</p><p>□ How can prayer help us to be loyal servants of Jehovah?</p><p><strong>[Study Questions]</strong></p><p> 1. How does Jehovah act with those loyal to him?</p><p> 2. What are some points presented in David’s song recorded in 2 Samuel chapter 22?</p><p> 3. From a Scriptural standpoint, what does it mean to be loyal?</p><p> 4. How is Jehovah’s loyalty shown?</p><p> 5. Since Jehovah is loyal, what does he require of his servants, and what question will be given consideration?</p><p> 6. How should we feel about the Scriptural things we have learned, and what should we remember about such knowledge?</p><p> 7. How should elders feel about spiritual food provided by God through the faithful slave?</p><p> 8. What if we do not fully appreciate some Scriptural point presented by the faithful and discreet slave?</p><p> 9. How does 1 John 1:3-6 show that Christians must have a spirit of fellowship?</p><p>10. Though Euodia and Syntyche apparently had difficulty resolving a personal problem, how did Paul view these women?</p><p>11. If a loyal Christian encounters a spiritual problem, what would it be fitting to keep in mind?</p><p>12. When Jesus’ statements caused ‘many disciples to go off to the things behind,’ what position did Peter take?</p><p>13, 14. (a) Why did first-century Judaism lack divine favor? (b) What did one longtime Witness of Jehovah say about God’s visible organization?</p><p>15. Why cooperate with Jehovah’s visible organization and with those shouldering responsibility in it?</p><p>16. A desire to do what for others should also move us to serve Jehovah loyally?</p><p>17. How does love build up, and what will it prevent us from doing?</p><p>18. What would Satan like to do to Jehovah’s people, but why can he not do so?</p><p>19. (a) What warning about Satan’s efforts did this journal give years ago? (b) To avoid Satan’s snares, what care should we exercise in dealing with fellow believers?</p><p>20, 21. How is prayerful reliance on Jehovah related to serving him loyally?</p><p>22. How should Jehovah’s many blessings affect our loyalty?</p><p><strong>[Picture on page 23]</strong></p><p>Jehovah’s loyal servants do not allow their lionlike Adversary, the Devil, to disrupt their unity</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
