<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 Thriving Spiritually in Old Age</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016286.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 92:0-101:8)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A melody. A song for the Sabbath day. <strong>92 </strong>It is good to give thanks to Jehovah And to sing praises* to your name, O Most High,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>To declare your loyal love in the morning And your faithfulness during the nights,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument and a lute, By the melodious sound of a harp.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your deeds; Because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>How great your works are, O Jehovah! How very deep your thoughts are!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>No unreasoning man can know them; And no foolish person can understand this:  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When the wicked sprout like weeds* And all the wrongdoers flourish, It is that they may be annihilated forever.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But you are exalted forever, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Indeed, look in triumph on your enemies, O Jehovah, Look at how your enemies will perish; All the wrongdoers will be scattered. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>But you will exalt my strength* like that of a wild bull; I will moisten my skin with fresh oil. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My eyes will look in triumph on my foes; My ears will hear about the downfall of the evil men who attack me. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But the righteous will flourish like a palm tree And grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They are planted in the house of Jehovah; They flourish in the courtyards of our God. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Even in old age* they will still be thriving; They will remain vigorous* and fresh, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Declaring that Jehovah is upright. He is my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness. </p><p><strong>93 </strong>Jehovah has become King! With grandeur he is clothed; Jehovah is clothed with strength; He wears it like a belt. The earth* is firmly established; It cannot be moved.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Your throne was firmly established long ago; From eternity you have existed.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The rivers have surged, O Jehovah, The rivers have surged and roared; The rivers keep surging and pounding.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Above the sound of many waters, Mightier than the breaking waves of the sea, Jehovah is majestic in the heights.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Your reminders are very trustworthy. Holiness adorns* your house, O Jehovah, for all times. </p><p><strong>94 </strong>O God of vengeance, Jehovah, O God of vengeance, shine forth!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Rise up, O Judge of the earth. Repay to the haughty what they deserve.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>How long will the wicked, O Jehovah, How long will the wicked continue to exult?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They babble and speak arrogantly; All the wrongdoers brag about themselves.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They crush your people, O Jehovah, And oppress your inheritance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They kill the widow and the foreign resident, And they murder the fatherless children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They say: “Jah does not see; The God of Jacob does not take notice of it.”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Understand this, you who are unreasoning; You foolish ones, when will you ever show insight?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The One who made* the ear, can he not hear? The One who formed the eye, can he not see? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The One correcting the nations, can he not reprove? He is the One who imparts knowledge to people! <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah knows the thoughts of men, That they are but a mere breath. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Happy is the man whom you correct, O Jah, Whom you teach from your law, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>To give him tranquillity during days of calamity, Until a pit is dug for the wicked. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will not forsake his people, Nor will he abandon his inheritance. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>For judgment will once again be righteous, And all the upright in heart will follow it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Who will rise up for me against the wicked? Who will take a stand for me against the wrongdoers? <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>If Jehovah had not been my helper, I* would soon have perished.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>When I said: “My foot is slipping,” Your loyal love, O Jehovah, kept supporting me. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When anxieties* overwhelmed me,* You comforted and soothed me.* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Can a throne* of corruption be allied with you While it is framing trouble in the name of the law?* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They make vicious attacks on the righteous one* And condemn the innocent one to death.* <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>But Jehovah will become a secure refuge* for me, My God is my rock of refuge. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He will make their wicked deeds come back upon them. He will do away with* them by means of their own evil. Jehovah our God will do away with* them. </p><p><strong>95 </strong>Come, let us shout joyfully to Jehovah! Let us shout in triumph to our Rock of salvation.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let us come into his presence* with thanksgiving; Let us sing and shout in triumph to him.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is a great God, A great King over all other gods.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In his hand are the depths of the earth; The mountain peaks belong to him.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The sea, which he made, belongs to him, And his hands formed the dry land.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Come, let us worship and bow down; Let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For he is our God, And we are the people of his pasture, The sheep in his care.* Today if you listen to his voice,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not harden your heart as at Merʹi·bah,* As in the day of Masʹsah* in the wilderness,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When your forefathers tested me; They challenged me, though they had seen my works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For 40 years I felt a loathing toward that generation, and I said: “They are a people who always go astray in their hearts; They have not come to know my ways.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So I swore in my anger: “They will not enter into my rest.” </p><p><strong>96 </strong>Sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing to Jehovah; praise his name. Proclaim the good news of his salvation day after day.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Declare his glory among the nations, His wonderful works among all the peoples.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise. He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods, But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In his presence are majesty* and splendor; Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples, Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Give Jehovah the glory due his name; Bring a gift and come into his courtyards.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Bow down to* Jehovah in holy adornment;* Tremble before him, all the earth! <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Declare among the nations: “Jehovah has become King! The earth* is firmly established, it cannot be moved.* He will judge* the peoples fairly.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful; Let the sea thunder and all that fills it; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Let the fields and everything in them rejoice. At the same time let all the trees of the forest shout joyfully <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Before Jehovah, for he is coming,* He is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth* with righteousness And the peoples with his faithfulness. </p><p><strong>97 </strong>Jehovah has become King! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Clouds and thick gloom are all around him; Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Fire goes before him And consumes his adversaries on every side.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>His lightning bolts light up the land; The earth sees it and trembles.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The mountains melt like wax before Jehovah, Before the Lord of the whole earth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The heavens proclaim his righteousness, And all the peoples see his glory.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let all those serving any carved image be put to shame, Those who boast about their worthless gods. Bow down to* him, all you gods.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Zion hears and rejoices; The towns* of Judah are joyful Because of your judgments, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For you, O Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth; You are exalted far above all other gods. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives* of his loyal ones; He rescues them from the hand* of the wicked. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Light has flashed up for the righteous And rejoicing for those upright in heart. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Rejoice in Jehovah, you righteous ones, And give thanks to his holy name.* </p><p>A melody. <strong>98 </strong>Sing to Jehovah a new song, For he has done wonderful things. His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made known his salvation; He has revealed his righteousness before the nations.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He has remembered his loyal love and faithfulness to the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation by our God.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth. Be cheerful and shout joyfully and sing praises.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Sing praises* to Jehovah with the harp, With the harp and the melodious song.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>With the trumpets and the sound of the horn, Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let the sea thunder and all that fills it, The earth* and those dwelling in it.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let the rivers clap their hands; Let the mountains shout joyfully together  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Before Jehovah, for he is coming* to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth* with righteousness And the peoples with fairness. </p><p><strong>99 </strong>Jehovah has become King. Let the peoples tremble. He sits enthroned above* the cherubs. Let the earth shake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great in Zion, And he is high over all the peoples.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let them praise your great name, For it is awe-inspiring and holy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He is a mighty king who loves justice. You have firmly established what is upright. You have brought about justice and righteousness in Jacob.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Exalt Jehovah our God and bow down* at his footstool; He is holy.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Moses and Aaron were among his priests, And Samuel was among those calling on his name. They would call to Jehovah, And he would answer them.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He would speak to them from the pillar of cloud. They kept his reminders and the decree that he gave to them.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah our God, you answered them. You were a God who pardoned them, But you punished* them for their sinful deeds.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Exalt Jehovah our God And bow down* before his holy mountain, For Jehovah our God is holy. </p><p>A melody of thanksgiving. <strong>100 </strong>Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Serve Jehovah with rejoicing. Come into his presence with joyful shouting.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Know* that Jehovah is God. He is the one who made us, and we belong to him.* We are his people and the sheep of his pasture.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Come into his gates with thanksgiving, Into his courtyards with praise. Give thanks to him; praise his name.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is good; His loyal love endures forever, And his faithfulness through all generations. </p><p>Of David. A melody. <strong>101 </strong>I will sing about loyal love and justice. To you, O Jehovah, I will sing praises.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will act with discretion and blamelessness.* When will you come to me? I will walk with integrity of heart inside my house.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I will not set anything worthless* before my eyes. I hate the deeds of those who deviate from what is right; I will have nothing to do with them.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A crooked heart is far from me; I will not accept* what is bad.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Anyone slandering his neighbor in secret, I will silence.* Anyone with haughty eyes and an arrogant heart, I will not tolerate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I will look to the faithful ones of the earth, So that they may dwell with me. The one walking in blamelessness* will minister to me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>No deceitful person will dwell in my house, And no liar will stand in my presence.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Every morning I will silence* all the wicked of the earth, To cut off all wrongdoers from the city of Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “grass.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “during gray-headedness.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “cannot totter.”</p><p>Or “befits.”</p><p>Lit., “planted.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Lit., “resided in silence.”</p><p>Or “disquieting thoughts.”</p><p>Or “became many inside of me.”</p><p>Or “Your consolations soothed my soul.”</p><p>Or “rulers; judges.”</p><p>Or “by decree.”</p><p>Or “the soul of the righteous one.”</p><p>Lit., “And the blood of the innocent they declare guilty (wicked).”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Lit., “will silence.”</p><p>Lit., “will silence.”</p><p>Lit., “before his face.”</p><p>Lit., “of his hand.”</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Meaning “Testing; Trial.”</p><p>Or “dignity.”</p><p>Or “Worship.”</p><p>Or possibly, “because of the splendor of his holiness.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “cannot totter.”</p><p>Or “plead the cause of.”</p><p>Or “has come.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Or “Worship.”</p><p>Lit., “daughters.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Or “has won him victory.”</p><p>Or “the victory of our God.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “has come.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Or possibly, “between.”</p><p>Or “worship.”</p><p>Lit., “executed vengeance against.”</p><p>Or “worship.”</p><p>Or “Acknowledge.”</p><p>Or possibly, “and not we ourselves.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “integrity.”</p><p>Or “good-for-nothing.”</p><p>Or “Their deeds do not cling to me.”</p><p>Lit., “know.”</p><p>Or “do away with.”</p><p>Or “in integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “in front of my eyes.”</p><p>Or “do away with.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
