<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 August 8-14</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016285.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 92:0-101:8)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A melody. A song for the Sabbath day. <strong>92 </strong>It is good to give thanks to Jehovah And to sing praises* to your name, O Most High,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>To declare your loyal love in the morning And your faithfulness during the nights,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Accompanied by a ten-stringed instrument and a lute, By the melodious sound of a harp.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For you have made me rejoice, O Jehovah, because of your deeds; Because of the works of your hands I shout joyfully.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>How great your works are, O Jehovah! How very deep your thoughts are!  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>No unreasoning man can know them; And no foolish person can understand this:  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When the wicked sprout like weeds* And all the wrongdoers flourish, It is that they may be annihilated forever.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But you are exalted forever, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Indeed, look in triumph on your enemies, O Jehovah, Look at how your enemies will perish; All the wrongdoers will be scattered. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>But you will exalt my strength* like that of a wild bull; I will moisten my skin with fresh oil. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My eyes will look in triumph on my foes; My ears will hear about the downfall of the evil men who attack me. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But the righteous will flourish like a palm tree And grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They are planted in the house of Jehovah; They flourish in the courtyards of our God. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Even in old age* they will still be thriving; They will remain vigorous* and fresh, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Declaring that Jehovah is upright. He is my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness. </p><p><strong>93 </strong>Jehovah has become King! With grandeur he is clothed; Jehovah is clothed with strength; He wears it like a belt. The earth* is firmly established; It cannot be moved.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Your throne was firmly established long ago; From eternity you have existed.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The rivers have surged, O Jehovah, The rivers have surged and roared; The rivers keep surging and pounding.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Above the sound of many waters, Mightier than the breaking waves of the sea, Jehovah is majestic in the heights.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Your reminders are very trustworthy. Holiness adorns* your house, O Jehovah, for all times. </p><p><strong>94 </strong>O God of vengeance, Jehovah, O God of vengeance, shine forth!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Rise up, O Judge of the earth. Repay to the haughty what they deserve.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>How long will the wicked, O Jehovah, How long will the wicked continue to exult?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They babble and speak arrogantly; All the wrongdoers brag about themselves.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They crush your people, O Jehovah, And oppress your inheritance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They kill the widow and the foreign resident, And they murder the fatherless children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They say: “Jah does not see; The God of Jacob does not take notice of it.”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Understand this, you who are unreasoning; You foolish ones, when will you ever show insight?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The One who made* the ear, can he not hear? The One who formed the eye, can he not see? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The One correcting the nations, can he not reprove? He is the One who imparts knowledge to people! <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah knows the thoughts of men, That they are but a mere breath. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Happy is the man whom you correct, O Jah, Whom you teach from your law, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>To give him tranquillity during days of calamity, Until a pit is dug for the wicked. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will not forsake his people, Nor will he abandon his inheritance. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>For judgment will once again be righteous, And all the upright in heart will follow it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Who will rise up for me against the wicked? Who will take a stand for me against the wrongdoers? <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>If Jehovah had not been my helper, I* would soon have perished.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>When I said: “My foot is slipping,” Your loyal love, O Jehovah, kept supporting me. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When anxieties* overwhelmed me,* You comforted and soothed me.* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Can a throne* of corruption be allied with you While it is framing trouble in the name of the law?* <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They make vicious attacks on the righteous one* And condemn the innocent one to death.* <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>But Jehovah will become a secure refuge* for me, My God is my rock of refuge. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He will make their wicked deeds come back upon them. He will do away with* them by means of their own evil. Jehovah our God will do away with* them. </p><p><strong>95 </strong>Come, let us shout joyfully to Jehovah! Let us shout in triumph to our Rock of salvation.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let us come into his presence* with thanksgiving; Let us sing and shout in triumph to him.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is a great God, A great King over all other gods.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In his hand are the depths of the earth; The mountain peaks belong to him.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The sea, which he made, belongs to him, And his hands formed the dry land.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Come, let us worship and bow down; Let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For he is our God, And we are the people of his pasture, The sheep in his care.* Today if you listen to his voice,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not harden your heart as at Merʹi·bah,* As in the day of Masʹsah* in the wilderness,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When your forefathers tested me; They challenged me, though they had seen my works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For 40 years I felt a loathing toward that generation, and I said: “They are a people who always go astray in their hearts; They have not come to know my ways.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So I swore in my anger: “They will not enter into my rest.” </p><p><strong>96 </strong>Sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing to Jehovah; praise his name. Proclaim the good news of his salvation day after day.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Declare his glory among the nations, His wonderful works among all the peoples.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise. He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods, But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In his presence are majesty* and splendor; Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples, Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Give Jehovah the glory due his name; Bring a gift and come into his courtyards.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Bow down to* Jehovah in holy adornment;* Tremble before him, all the earth! <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Declare among the nations: “Jehovah has become King! The earth* is firmly established, it cannot be moved.* He will judge* the peoples fairly.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful; Let the sea thunder and all that fills it; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Let the fields and everything in them rejoice. At the same time let all the trees of the forest shout joyfully <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Before Jehovah, for he is coming,* He is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth* with righteousness And the peoples with his faithfulness. </p><p><strong>97 </strong>Jehovah has become King! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Clouds and thick gloom are all around him; Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Fire goes before him And consumes his adversaries on every side.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>His lightning bolts light up the land; The earth sees it and trembles.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The mountains melt like wax before Jehovah, Before the Lord of the whole earth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The heavens proclaim his righteousness, And all the peoples see his glory.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let all those serving any carved image be put to shame, Those who boast about their worthless gods. Bow down to* him, all you gods.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Zion hears and rejoices; The towns* of Judah are joyful Because of your judgments, O Jehovah.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For you, O Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth; You are exalted far above all other gods. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>O you who love Jehovah, hate what is bad. He is guarding the lives* of his loyal ones; He rescues them from the hand* of the wicked. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Light has flashed up for the righteous And rejoicing for those upright in heart. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Rejoice in Jehovah, you righteous ones, And give thanks to his holy name.* </p><p>A melody. <strong>98 </strong>Sing to Jehovah a new song, For he has done wonderful things. His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made known his salvation; He has revealed his righteousness before the nations.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He has remembered his loyal love and faithfulness to the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation by our God.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth. Be cheerful and shout joyfully and sing praises.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Sing praises* to Jehovah with the harp, With the harp and the melodious song.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>With the trumpets and the sound of the horn, Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let the sea thunder and all that fills it, The earth* and those dwelling in it.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let the rivers clap their hands; Let the mountains shout joyfully together  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Before Jehovah, for he is coming* to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth* with righteousness And the peoples with fairness. </p><p><strong>99 </strong>Jehovah has become King. Let the peoples tremble. He sits enthroned above* the cherubs. Let the earth shake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great in Zion, And he is high over all the peoples.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let them praise your great name, For it is awe-inspiring and holy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He is a mighty king who loves justice. You have firmly established what is upright. You have brought about justice and righteousness in Jacob.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Exalt Jehovah our God and bow down* at his footstool; He is holy.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Moses and Aaron were among his priests, And Samuel was among those calling on his name. They would call to Jehovah, And he would answer them.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He would speak to them from the pillar of cloud. They kept his reminders and the decree that he gave to them.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah our God, you answered them. You were a God who pardoned them, But you punished* them for their sinful deeds.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Exalt Jehovah our God And bow down* before his holy mountain, For Jehovah our God is holy. </p><p>A melody of thanksgiving. <strong>100 </strong>Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Serve Jehovah with rejoicing. Come into his presence with joyful shouting.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Know* that Jehovah is God. He is the one who made us, and we belong to him.* We are his people and the sheep of his pasture.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Come into his gates with thanksgiving, Into his courtyards with praise. Give thanks to him; praise his name.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is good; His loyal love endures forever, And his faithfulness through all generations. </p><p>Of David. A melody. <strong>101 </strong>I will sing about loyal love and justice. To you, O Jehovah, I will sing praises.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will act with discretion and blamelessness.* When will you come to me? I will walk with integrity of heart inside my house.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I will not set anything worthless* before my eyes. I hate the deeds of those who deviate from what is right; I will have nothing to do with them.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>A crooked heart is far from me; I will not accept* what is bad.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Anyone slandering his neighbor in secret, I will silence.* Anyone with haughty eyes and an arrogant heart, I will not tolerate.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I will look to the faithful ones of the earth, So that they may dwell with me. The one walking in blamelessness* will minister to me.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>No deceitful person will dwell in my house, And no liar will stand in my presence.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Every morning I will silence* all the wicked of the earth, To cut off all wrongdoers from the city of Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “grass.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “during gray-headedness.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “cannot totter.”</p><p>Or “befits.”</p><p>Lit., “planted.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Lit., “resided in silence.”</p><p>Or “disquieting thoughts.”</p><p>Or “became many inside of me.”</p><p>Or “Your consolations soothed my soul.”</p><p>Or “rulers; judges.”</p><p>Or “by decree.”</p><p>Or “the soul of the righteous one.”</p><p>Lit., “And the blood of the innocent they declare guilty (wicked).”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Lit., “will silence.”</p><p>Lit., “will silence.”</p><p>Lit., “before his face.”</p><p>Lit., “of his hand.”</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Meaning “Testing; Trial.”</p><p>Or “dignity.”</p><p>Or “Worship.”</p><p>Or possibly, “because of the splendor of his holiness.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “cannot totter.”</p><p>Or “plead the cause of.”</p><p>Or “has come.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Or “Worship.”</p><p>Lit., “daughters.”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Lit., “memorial.”</p><p>Or “has won him victory.”</p><p>Or “the victory of our God.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “has come.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Or possibly, “between.”</p><p>Or “worship.”</p><p>Lit., “executed vengeance against.”</p><p>Or “worship.”</p><p>Or “Acknowledge.”</p><p>Or possibly, “and not we ourselves.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “integrity.”</p><p>Or “good-for-nothing.”</p><p>Or “Their deeds do not cling to me.”</p><p>Lit., “know.”</p><p>Or “do away with.”</p><p>Or “in integrity.”</p><p>Lit., “in front of my eyes.”</p><p>Or “do away with.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016285.xhtml#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Pss. 95:1-96:13)</strong></a> <span id="citation7"></span>Come, let us shout joyfully to Jehovah! Let us shout in triumph to our Rock of salvation.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let us come into his presence* with thanksgiving; Let us sing and shout in triumph to him.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is a great God, A great King over all other gods.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In his hand are the depths of the earth; The mountain peaks belong to him.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The sea, which he made, belongs to him, And his hands formed the dry land.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Come, let us worship and bow down; Let us kneel before Jehovah our Maker.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For he is our God, And we are the people of his pasture, The sheep in his care.* Today if you listen to his voice,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not harden your heart as at Merʹi·bah,* As in the day of Masʹsah* in the wilderness,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When your forefathers tested me; They challenged me, though they had seen my works. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For 40 years I felt a loathing toward that generation, and I said: “They are a people who always go astray in their hearts; They have not come to know my ways.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So I swore in my anger: “They will not enter into my rest.” </p><p><strong>96 </strong>Sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing to Jehovah; praise his name. Proclaim the good news of his salvation day after day.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Declare his glory among the nations, His wonderful works among all the peoples.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great and most worthy of praise. He is more awe-inspiring than all other gods.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>All the gods of the peoples are worthless gods, But Jehovah is the one who made the heavens.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In his presence are majesty* and splendor; Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Give Jehovah his due, you families of the peoples, Give Jehovah his due for his glory and strength.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Give Jehovah the glory due his name; Bring a gift and come into his courtyards.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Bow down to* Jehovah in holy adornment;* Tremble before him, all the earth! <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Declare among the nations: “Jehovah has become King! The earth* is firmly established, it cannot be moved.* He will judge* the peoples fairly.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be joyful; Let the sea thunder and all that fills it; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Let the fields and everything in them rejoice. At the same time let all the trees of the forest shout joyfully <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Before Jehovah, for he is coming,* He is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth* with righteousness And the peoples with his faithfulness.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “before his face.”</p><p>Lit., “of his hand.”</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Meaning “Testing; Trial.”</p><p>Or “dignity.”</p><p>Or “Worship.”</p><p>Or possibly, “because of the splendor of his holiness.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “cannot totter.”</p><p>Or “plead the cause of.”</p><p>Or “has come.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 28 The New Song***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 28</p>
<h1><strong>The New Song</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Psalm 98</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Sing to God a song, A song of praise that’s bold and new.</p>
<p class="p5">Tell of all the great things He’s done and yet will do.</p>
<p class="p6">Praise his mighty arm; He is the God of victory.</p>
<p class="p7">In the cause of justice, He judges righteously.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">Sing, sing, sing!</p>
<p class="p10">The new song, let it ring!</p>
<p class="p11">Sing, sing, sing!</p>
<p class="p12">Jehovah is our King.</p>
</div>
<p class="p13">2. Make a joyful shout, A joyful cry to God, our King!</p>
<p class="p14">Laud his name, give honor; A joyful anthem sing.</p>
<p class="p15">Join the mighty throng, And sing aloud before the Lord.</p>
<p class="p16">Harp and horn and trumpet Sound praise in full accord.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p17">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p18">Sing, sing, sing!</p>
<p class="p19">The new song, let it ring!</p>
<p class="p20">Sing, sing, sing!</p>
<p class="p21">Jehovah is our King.</p>
</div>
<p class="p22">3. Let the mighty sea And all therein resound with praise.</p>
<p class="p23">Join with earth’s creation, Exulting voices raise.</p>
<p class="p24">Let the land rejoice, And let the rivers clap their hands.</p>
<p class="p25">Mountains, hills, and valleys Sing praise in all the lands.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p26">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p27">Sing, sing, sing!</p>
<p class="p28">The new song, let it ring!</p>
<p class="p29">Sing, sing, sing!</p>
<p class="p30">Jehovah is our King.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p31">(See also <span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Ps. 96:1;</a><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"> 149:1;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> Isa. 42:10</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 98:0-9)</strong></a> A melody. <strong>98 </strong>Sing to Jehovah a new song, For he has done wonderful things. His right hand, his holy arm, has brought about salvation.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah has made known his salvation; He has revealed his righteousness before the nations.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He has remembered his loyal love and faithfulness to the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation by our God.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Shout in triumph to Jehovah, all the earth. Be cheerful and shout joyfully and sing praises.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Sing praises* to Jehovah with the harp, With the harp and the melodious song.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>With the trumpets and the sound of the horn, Shout in triumph before the King, Jehovah.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Let the sea thunder and all that fills it, The earth* and those dwelling in it.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Let the rivers clap their hands; Let the mountains shout joyfully together  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Before Jehovah, for he is coming* to judge the earth. He will judge the inhabited earth* with righteousness And the peoples with fairness.</p><p></p><p>Or “has won him victory.”</p><p>Or “the victory of our God.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “has come.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 96:1)</strong></a> Sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 149:1)</strong></a> Praise Jah!* Sing to Jehovah a new song; Praise him in the congregation of the loyal ones.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Isa. 42:10)</strong></a> Sing to Jehovah a new song, His praise from the ends of the earth, You who go down to the sea and all that fills it, You islands and their inhabitants.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w07 9/15 p. 32 “Thriving During Gray-Headedness”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>“Thriving During Gray-Headedness”</strong></p>
<p class="p2">MANY people in Mediterranean lands plant date palms in their courtyards. These trees are known for their beauty and tasty fruit. Moreover, they keep on thriving for well over a hundred years.</p>
<p class="p3">King Solomon of ancient Israel poetically described the stature of a beautiful Shulammite girl as resembling a palm tree. (<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Song of Solomon 7:7</a>) The book <em>Plants of the Bible </em>states: “The Hebrew word for the date palm is ‘tàmâr.’ . . . It became the Jews’ symbol of grace and elegance and was often bestowed by them to women.” For example, Solomon’s beautiful half sister was named Tamar. (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">2 Samuel 13:1</a>) Some parents still give that name to their daughters.</p>
<p class="p4">Beautiful women are not the only ones likened to a palm tree. The psalmist sang: “The righteous himself will blossom forth as a palm tree does; as a cedar in Lebanon does, he will grow big. Those who are planted in the house of Jehovah, in the courtyards of our God, they will blossom forth. They will still keep on thriving during gray-headedness, fat and fresh they will continue to be.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Psalm 92:12-14</a>.</p>
<p class="p5">Figuratively speaking, those who serve God faithfully during their old age have much in common with the elegant palm tree. “Gray-headedness is a crown of beauty when it is found in the way of righteousness,” says the Bible. (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Proverbs 16:31</a>) Although their physical strength may falter with advancing years, elderly ones can retain their spiritual vitality by drawing sustenance through a regular study of God’s Word, the Bible. (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Psalm 1:1-3;</a><span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18"> Jeremiah 17:7, 8</a>) Thanks to their winsome words and their fine example, faithful older ones are a tremendous source of encouragement to others and keep bearing fruit year after year. (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Titus 2:2-5;</a><span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20"> Hebrews 13:15, 16</a>) Like the date palm, elderly ones can thrive in their old age.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Song of Sol. 7:7)</strong></a> Your stature is like a palm tree, And your breasts are like date clusters.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(2 Sam. 13:1)</strong></a> Now David’s son Abʹsa·lom had a beautiful sister named Taʹmar, and David’s son Amʹnon fell in love with her.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Ps. 92:12-14)</strong></a> But the righteous will flourish like a palm tree And grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>They are planted in the house of Jehovah; They flourish in the courtyards of our God. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Even in old age* they will still be thriving; They will remain vigorous* and fresh,</p><p></p><p>Or “during gray-headedness.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:31)</strong></a> Gray hair is a crown of beauty* When it is found in the way of righteousness.</p><p></p><p>Or “glory.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Ps. 1:1-3)</strong></a> Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked And does not stand on the path of sinners And does not sit in the seat of scoffers.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone* day and night.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will be like a tree planted by streams of water, A tree that produces fruit in its season, The foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.</p><p></p><p>Or “he meditates on His law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Jer. 17:7, 8)</strong></a> Blessed is the man* who puts his trust in Jehovah, Whose confidence is in Jehovah.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will become like a tree planted by the waters, That sends out its roots to the stream. He will not notice when heat comes, But his leaves will always flourish. And in the year of drought he will not be anxious, Nor will he quit producing fruit.</p><p></p><p>Or “strong man.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Titus 2:2-5)</strong></a> Let the older men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Likewise, let the older women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>so that they may advise* the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>to be sound in mind, chaste, working at home,* good, subjecting themselves to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be spoken of abusively.</p><p></p><p>Or “recall to their senses; train.”</p><p>Or “caring for their homes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Heb. 13:15, 16)</strong></a> Through him let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our lips that make public declaration to his name. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Moreover, do not forget to do good and to share what you have with others, for God is well-pleased with such sacrifices.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w06 7/15 p. 13 par. 2 Highlights From Books Three and Four of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p36"><span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21"><strong>92:12</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—In what way do the righteous “blossom forth as a palm tree does”? </strong>The palm tree is noted for its productivity. A righteous person is like a palm tree in that he is upright in Jehovah’s eyes and keeps bearing “fine fruit,” which includes good works.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Matthew 7:17-20</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 92:12)</strong> But the righteous will flourish like a palm tree And grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 7:17-20)</strong> Likewise, every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, nor can a rotten tree produce fine fruit. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Every tree not producing fine fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Really, then, by their fruits you will recognize those men.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w14 1/15 p. 26 Serving Jehovah Before the Days of Distress Come***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>17. </strong>How might we be able to help elderly and infirm Christians to share in true worship?</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Today, we should be alert to help elderly or infirm Christians. Some who would dearly love to be at congregation meetings and assemblies may rarely be able to do so. In some places, congregations lovingly arrange for such elderly ones to listen to the meetings by telephone. In other places, this may not be possible. Even so, Christians who cannot attend meetings can share in supporting true worship. For example, their prayers contribute to the success of the Christian congregation.<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23"><strong>Psalm 92:13, 14</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 92:13, 14)</strong> They are planted in the house of Jehovah; They flourish in the courtyards of our God. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Even in old age* they will still be thriving; They will remain vigorous* and fresh,</p><p></p><p>Or “during gray-headedness.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w04 5/15 p. 12 Elderly Ones—Valuable Members of Our Christian Brotherhood***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p12"><strong>“Fat and Fresh They Will Continue to Be”</strong></p>
<p class="qu">9, 10. How do older Christians remain healthy in faith and retain their spiritual vigor? (See box on page 13.)</p>
<p class="p13"><sup>9 </sup>Calling attention to the fruitfulness of elderly servants of Jehovah, the psalmist sang: “The righteous himself will blossom forth as a palm tree does; as a cedar in Lebanon does, he will grow big. They will still keep on thriving during gray-headedness, fat and fresh they will continue to be.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Psalm 92:12,</a><span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25"> 14</a>.</p>
<p class="p14"><sup>10 </sup>How can you retain your spiritual vigor despite advancing years? The secret of the palm tree’s perennial beauty lies in an unfailing source of fresh water. Likewise, you can draw sustenance from the waters of Bible truth by your study of God’s Word and by association with his organization. (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Psalm 1:1-3;</a><span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27"> Jeremiah 17:7, 8</a>) Your spiritual vitality makes you a precious asset to fellow believers. Consider how this proved true in the case of elderly High Priest Jehoiada.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 92:12)</strong> But the righteous will flourish like a palm tree And grow big like a cedar in Lebʹa·non.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 92:14)</strong> Even in old age* they will still be thriving; They will remain vigorous* and fresh,</p><p></p><p>Or “during gray-headedness.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 1:1-3)</strong> Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked And does not stand on the path of sinners And does not sit in the seat of scoffers.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone* day and night.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will be like a tree planted by streams of water, A tree that produces fruit in its season, The foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.</p><p></p><p>Or “he meditates on His law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Jer. 17:7, 8)</strong> Blessed is the man* who puts his trust in Jehovah, Whose confidence is in Jehovah.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will become like a tree planted by the waters, That sends out its roots to the stream. He will not notice when heat comes, But his leaves will always flourish. And in the year of drought he will not be anxious, Nor will he quit producing fruit.</p><p></p><p>Or “strong man.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w04 5/15 pp. 12-14 Elderly Ones—Valuable Members of Our Christian Brotherhood***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">13. How can older Christians ‘do good with the true God and his house’?</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>13 </sup>Perhaps poor health or other circumstances limit what you can do to promote true worship. Even if that is so, it is within your power to ‘do good with the true God and his house.’ You can display zeal for Jehovah’s spiritual house by attending and participating in congregation meetings and by sharing in the field ministry whenever possible. Your ready acceptance of the Bible’s counsel and your loyal support for “the faithful and discreet slave” and the congregation will have a strengthening effect on the Christian brotherhood. (<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Matthew 24:45-47</a>) You can also incite fellow worshipers “to love and fine works.” (<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Hebrews 10:24, 25;</a><span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30"> Philemon 8, 9</a>) And you will be a blessing to others if you act in harmony with the apostle Paul’s counsel: “Let the aged men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy [“vigorous,” <em>An American Translation</em>] in faith, in love, in endurance. Likewise let the aged women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, neither enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Titus 2:2-4</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">14. What can longtime Christian overseers do to promote true worship?</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>14 </sup>Have you served as a congregation elder for many years? “Use the wisdom that comes with advancing years unselfishly,” is the advice of one longtime congregation elder. “Delegate responsibility, and share your experience with others who have a willing spirit . . . See the potential in others. Develop and nurture it. Build for the future.” (<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Deuteronomy 3:27, 28</a>) Your genuine interest in the ever-expanding Kingdom work will result in many blessings for others in our Christian brotherhood.</p>
<p class="p19"><strong>“Tell That Jehovah Is Upright”</strong></p>
<p class="qu">15. How do elderly Christians “tell that Jehovah is upright”?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>15 </sup>Older servants of God joyfully discharge their responsibility “to tell that Jehovah is upright.” If you are an elderly Christian, your words and deeds can show others that ‘Jehovah is your Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness.’ (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Psalm 92:15</a>) The palm tree bears silent witness to its Creator’s superlative qualities. But Jehovah has given you the privilege of testifying about him to those now embracing true worship. (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Deuteronomy 32:7;</a><span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35"> Psalm 71:17, 18;</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> Joel 1:2, 3</a>) Why is this important?</p>
<p class="qu">16. What Bible example illustrates the importance of ‘telling that Jehovah is upright’?</p>
<p class="p21"><sup>16 </sup>When the Israelite leader Joshua was “old and advanced in days,” he “proceeded to call all Israel, its older men and its heads and its judges and its officers,” and to remind them of God’s upright dealings. He said: “Not one word out of all the good words that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you.” (<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Joshua 23:1, 2,</a><span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38"> 14</a>) For a time, these words strengthened the people’s resolve to remain faithful. After Joshua’s death, however, “another generation began to rise . . . that did not know Jehovah or the work that he had done for Israel. And the sons of Israel fell to doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah and serving the Baals.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Judges 2:8-11</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">17. How has Jehovah dealt with his people in modern times?</p>
<p class="p22"><sup>17 </sup>The integrity of the present-day Christian congregation does not depend upon the oral testimony of older servants of God. Yet, our faith in Jehovah and his promises is reinforced when we hear firsthand accounts of the “great work” that he has performed for his people in these last days. (<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Judges 2:7;</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> 2 Peter 1:16-19</a>) If you have been associated with Jehovah’s organization for many years, you may recall the time when there were very few Kingdom proclaimers in your region or country or when the preaching work faced stiff opposition. Over time, you have seen Jehovah remove certain obstacles and ‘speed up’ Kingdom growth. (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Isaiah 54:17;</a><span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43"> 60:22</a>) You have noted the clarification of Bible truths and have witnessed the progressive refinement of the visible part of God’s organization. (<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Proverbs 4:18;</a><span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45"> Isaiah 60:17</a>) Do you seek to build others up by sharing with them your experience relating to Jehovah’s upright dealings? What a positive and strengthening effect this can have on the Christian brotherhood!</p>
<p class="qu">18. (a) Illustrate the long-term effect of ‘telling others that Jehovah is upright.’ (b) How have you personally experienced Jehovah’s uprightness?</p>
<p class="p23"><sup>18 </sup>What about the occasions when you have experienced Jehovah’s loving care and guidance in your personal life? (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Psalm 37:25;</a><span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47"> Matthew 6:33;</a><span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48"> 1 Peter 5:7</a>) An elderly sister named Martha used to encourage others by saying: “No matter what happens, never abandon Jehovah. He will sustain you.” This advice had a profound effect on Tolmina, one of Martha’s Bible students who was baptized in the early 1960’s. “When my husband died,” recalls Tolmina, “I felt very discouraged, but those words made me determined not to miss a single meeting. And Jehovah really did strengthen me to continue.” Tolmina has given the same advice to many of her own Bible students over the years. Indeed, by offering encouragement and recounting Jehovah’s upright dealings, you can do much to build up the faith of fellow believers.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Philem. 8, 9)</strong> For this very reason, though I have great freeness of speech in connection with Christ to order you to do what is proper, <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>I would rather appeal to you on the basis of love, seeing that I am Paul an older man, yes, now also a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Titus 2:2-4)</strong> Let the older men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Likewise, let the older women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>so that they may advise* the younger women to love their husbands, to love their children,</p><p></p><p>Or “recall to their senses; train.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 3:27, 28)</strong> Go up to the top of Pisʹgah, and look to the west and north and south and east and view the land with your eyes, for you will not cross over this Jordan. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Commission Joshua and encourage him and strengthen him, because he is the one who will cross over before this people and he is the one who will cause them to inherit the land that you will see.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 92:15)</strong> Declaring that Jehovah is upright. He is my Rock, in whom there is no unrighteousness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 32:7)</strong> Remember the days of old; Consider the years of past generations. Ask your father, and he can tell you; Your elders, and they will inform you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 71:17, 18)</strong> O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Joel 1:2, 3)</strong> “Hear this, you elders, And pay attention, all you inhabitants of the land.* Has anything like this happened in your days Or in the days of your forefathers?  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Tell about it to your sons, And let your sons tell about it to their sons, And their sons to the next generation.</p><p></p><p>Or “earth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 23:1, 2)</strong> Many days after Jehovah had given Israel rest from all its surrounding enemies, when Joshua was old and advanced in years, <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Joshua summoned all Israel, its elders, its heads, its judges, and its officers, and he said to them: “I have grown old; I am advanced in years.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Josh. 23:14)</strong> “Now look! I am about to die,* and you well know with all your heart and with all your soul* that not one word out of all the good promises that Jehovah your God has spoken to you has failed. They have all come true for you. Not one word of them has failed.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “I am going today in the way of all the earth.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Judg. 2:8-11)</strong> Then Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died at the age of 110. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So they buried him in the territory of his inheritance in Timʹnath-heʹres, in the mountainous region of Eʹphra·im, north of Mount Gaʹash. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>All that generation were gathered to their ancestors,* and another generation arose after them that did not know Jehovah or what he had done for Israel. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So the Israelites did what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah and served* the Baʹals.</p><p></p><p>This is a poetic expression for death.</p><p>Or “worshipped.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Judg. 2:7)</strong> The people continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua and who had seen all of Jehovah’s great deeds in behalf of Israel.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(2 Pet. 1:16-19)</strong> No, it was not by following artfully contrived false stories that we made known to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, but rather, we were eyewitnesses of his magnificence. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For he received from God the Father honor and glory when words such as these* were conveyed to him by the magnificent glory: “This is my Son, my beloved, whom I myself have approved.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Yes, these words we heard coming from heaven while we were with him in the holy mountain. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So we have the prophetic word made more sure, and you are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place (until day dawns and a daystar rises) in your hearts.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “such a voice.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 54:17)</strong> No weapon formed against you will have any success, And you will condemn any tongue that rises up against you in the judgment. This is the heritage* of the servants of Jehovah, And their righteousness is from me,” declares Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “inheritance.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 60:22)</strong> The little one will become a thousand And the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 4:18)</strong> But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light That grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 60:17)</strong> Instead of the copper I will bring in gold, And instead of the iron I will bring in silver, Instead of the wood, copper, And instead of the stones, iron; And I will appoint peace as your overseers And righteousness as your task assigners.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 37:25)</strong> I was once young and now I am old, But I have not seen anyone righteous abandoned, Nor his children looking for bread.*</p><p></p><p>Or “food.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:33)</strong> “Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 5:7)</strong> while you throw all your anxiety* on him, because he cares for you.</p><p></p><p>Or “cares; worries.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w15 7/15 p. 8 Work to Enhance the Spiritual Paradise***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>We thereby follow the example of the faithful servants of Jehovah described at <span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49"><strong>Psalm 99:1-3,</strong></a><span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50"> <strong>5</strong></a><strong>. (Read.) </strong>As that psalm indicates, Moses, Aaron, and Samuel offered their full support to the arrangement for true worship in their day. (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Ps. 99:6, 7</a>) Today, before moving on to serve as priests with Jesus in heaven, the remaining ones of his anointed brothers faithfully serve in the earthly courtyard of the spiritual temple. Millions of “other sheep” loyally support them. (<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">John 10:16</a>) Although having different hopes, both groups unitedly worship Jehovah here at God’s footstool. As <em>individuals, </em>however, we do well to ask ourselves, ‘Am I giving full support to Jehovah’s arrangement for pure worship?’</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 99:1-3)</strong> Jehovah has become King. Let the peoples tremble. He sits enthroned above* the cherubs. Let the earth shake.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah is great in Zion, And he is high over all the peoples.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let them praise your great name, For it is awe-inspiring and holy.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “between.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 99:5)</strong> Exalt Jehovah our God and bow down* at his footstool; He is holy.</p><p></p><p>Or “worship.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 99:6, 7)</strong> Moses and Aaron were among his priests, And Samuel was among those calling on his name. They would call to Jehovah, And he would answer them.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He would speak to them from the pillar of cloud. They kept his reminders and the decree that he gave to them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 10:16)</strong> “And I have other sheep, which are not of this fold; those too I must bring in, and they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w05 11/1 pp. 24-25 Will You Walk With God?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p19"><strong>Walk as Though “Seeing the One Who Is Invisible”</strong></p>
<p class="qu">14. If Jehovah is real to us, how will that be reflected in the personal decisions that we make?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>14 </sup>For us to walk with Jehovah, he must be real to us. Remember, Jehovah assured faithful ones in ancient Israel that he was not hidden from them. Today, he likewise reveals himself to his people as the Grand Instructor. Is Jehovah that real to you, as though he were standing before you to instruct you? That is the kind of faith we need if we are to walk with God. Moses had such faith, “for he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.” (<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Hebrews 11:27</a>) If Jehovah is real to us, then we will take his feelings into account when we make decisions. For example, we would not even consider engaging in wrongdoing and then try to hide our sins from Christian elders or family members. Rather, we endeavor to walk with God even when no fellow human can see us. Like King David of old, we resolve: “I shall walk about in the integrity of my heart inside my house.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Psalm 101:2</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 11:27)</strong> By faith he left Egypt, but not fearing the anger of the king, for he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 101:2)</strong> I will act with discretion and blamelessness.* When will you come to me? I will walk with integrity of heart inside my house.</p><p></p><p>Or “integrity.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***bh pp. 161-162 Take Your Stand for True Worship***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>PRACTICE TRUE WORSHIP</strong></h2>
<p class="qu">18. How can attending Christian meetings help you to take a stand for true worship?</p>
<p class="p30"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>To please God, you must reject false worship and take a stand for true worship. What does this include? The Bible states: “Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.” (<span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) Christian meetings are happy occasions for you to worship God in the way that he approves. (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Psalm 22:22;</a><span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57"> 122:1</a>) At such meetings, there is “an interchange of encouragement” among faithful Christians.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Romans 1:12</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">19. Why is it important that you speak to others about the things you have learned from the Bible?</p>
<p class="p31"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Another way that you can take a stand for true worship is to speak to others about the things you have learned from studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many people truly are “sighing and groaning” over the wickedness that is taking place in the world today. (<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">Ezekiel 9:4</a>) Perhaps you know some people who feel that way. Why not speak to them about your Bible-based hope for the future? As you associate with true Christians and speak to others about the marvelous Bible truths you have learned, you will find that any desire for the customs of false worship that may have remained in your heart will gradually disappear. Be assured that you will be very happy and will receive many blessings if you take your stand for true worship.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Malachi 3:10</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 22:22)</strong> I will declare your name to my brothers; In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 122:1)</strong> I rejoiced when they said to me: “Let us go to the house of Jehovah.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:12)</strong> or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Ezek. 9:4)</strong> Jehovah said to him: “Go through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on the foreheads of the men who are sighing and groaning over all the detestable things that are being done in the city.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:10)</strong> Bring the entire tithe* into the storehouse, so that there may be food in my house; and test me out, please, in this regard,” Jehovah of armies says, “to see whether I will not open to you the floodgates of the heavens and pour out* on you a blessing until there is nothing lacking.”</p><p></p><p>Or “all the tenth parts.”</p><p>Lit., “empty out.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***sn song 90 Beauty in Gray-Headedness***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 90</p>
<h1><strong>Beauty in Gray-Headedness</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Proverbs 16:31</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Here with us are aged ones,</p>
<p class="p5">Those whose youth has passed.</p>
<p class="p6">Here among us they endure;</p>
<p class="p7">Still they’re holding fast.</p>
<p class="p8">Loss of strength besets them all;</p>
<p class="p9">Loss of mates for some.</p>
<p class="p10">Father, please confirm their faith</p>
<p class="p11">In the life to come.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p12">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p13">Father, you remember</p>
<p class="p14">How in faith they’ve run.</p>
<p class="p15">Give them your assurance;</p>
<p class="p16">May they hear, “Well done!”</p>
</div>
<p class="p17">2. Comely is gray-headedness</p>
<p class="p18">Found in ways of right.</p>
<p class="p19">Beautiful are faithful ones</p>
<p class="p20">In Jehovah’s sight.</p>
<p class="p21">May we always recognize</p>
<p class="p22">They were once young too.</p>
<p class="p23">Loyally they gave their best</p>
<p class="p24">When their strength was new.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p25">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p26">Father, you remember</p>
<p class="p27">How in faith they’ve run.</p>
<p class="p28">Give them your assurance;</p>
<p class="p29">May they hear, “Well done!”</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p30">(See also <span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Matt. 25:21,</a><span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63"> 23;</a><span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64"> Ps. 71:9,</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> 18;</a><span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66"> Prov. 20:29;</a><span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67"> Luke 22:28;</a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> 1 Tim. 5:1</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Prov. 16:31)</strong></a> Gray hair is a crown of beauty* When it is found in the way of righteousness.</p><p></p><p>Or “glory.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Matt. 25:21)</strong></a> His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Matt. 25:23)</strong></a> His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Ps. 71:9)</strong></a> Do not cast me off in my old age; Do not abandon me when my strength fails.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(Ps. 71:18)</strong></a> Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(Prov. 20:29)</strong></a> The glory of young men is their strength, And the splendor of old men is their gray hair.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Luke 22:28)</strong></a> “However, you are the ones who have stuck with me in my trials;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 5:1)</strong></a> Do not severely criticize an older man. On the contrary, appeal to him as a father, to younger men as brothers,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***ia pp. 183-186 He Fought Against Fear and Doubt***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>13, 14. </strong>What miracle did Jesus perform for Peter, and how did Peter react?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>When Jesus finished speaking, he told Peter: “Pull out to where it is deep, and you men let down your nets for a catch.” Peter was full of doubt. He said: “Instructor, for a whole night we toiled and took nothing, but at your bidding I will lower the nets.” Peter had just washed off the nets. Surely the last thing he wanted to do was lower them yet again<wbr />—especially now when the fish would not even be feeding! Still, he complied, likely signaling to his partners in a second boat to follow them.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Luke 5:4, 5</a>.</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Peter felt an unexpected weight as he started hauling in the nets. Incredulous, he pulled harder, and before long he could see a great mass of fish wriggling within the mesh! Frantically, he motioned to the men in the second boat to come to help. As they did, it soon became apparent that one boat could not contain all these fish. They filled both vessels, but there were too many<wbr />—the boats started to sink under the weight. Peter was overwhelmed with astonishment. He had seen Christ’s power in action before, but this instance was so personal. Here was a man who could even cause the fish to enter the nets! Fear welled up in Peter. He sank to his knees and said: “Depart from me, because I am a sinful man, Lord.” How could he ever prove worthy to associate with One who wielded the very power of God in such ways?<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70"><strong><em>Luke 5:6-9</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>15. </strong>How did Jesus teach Peter that his doubts and fears were unfounded?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Jesus kindly said: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men alive.” (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Luke 5:10, 11</a>) This was no time for doubt or fear. Peter’s doubts about such practical matters as fishing were unfounded; his fears about his own faults and inadequacies were just as baseless. Jesus had a great work to do, a ministry that would change history. He served a God who “will forgive in a large way.” (<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Isa. 55:7</a>) Jehovah would take care of Peter’s needs, both physical and spiritual.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Matt. 6:33</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>16. </strong>How did Peter, James, and John respond to Jesus’ invitation, and why was it the best decision they could make?</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Peter responded quickly, as did James and John. “They brought the boats back to land, and abandoned everything and followed him.” (<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Luke 5:11</a>) Peter put faith in Jesus and in the One who sent him. It was the best decision he could make. Christians today who overcome their doubt and fear to take up service to God are likewise showing faith. Such trust in Jehovah is never misplaced.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Ps. 22:4, 5</a>.</p>
<h2><strong>“Why Did You Give Way to Doubt?”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>17. </strong>Peter had what memories of the two years since meeting Jesus?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Some two years after meeting Jesus, Peter rowed through that windy night on the Sea of Galilee, as mentioned at the outset of this chapter. Of course, we cannot know what memories crossed his mind. There were so many to choose from! Jesus had healed Peter’s mother-in-law. He had delivered the Sermon on the Mount. Again and again, through his teaching and his powerful works, he had demonstrated that he was Jehovah’s Chosen One, the Messiah. As the months passed, Peter’s faults, such as his tendency to give in to impulses of fear and doubt, had surely subsided to a degree. Jesus had even chosen Peter to be one of the 12 apostles! Still, Peter had not yet vanquished fear and doubt, as he would soon learn.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>18, 19. </strong>(a) Describe what Peter saw on the Sea of Galilee. (b) How did Jesus grant Peter’s request?</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>During the fourth watch of that night, or sometime between 3:00 a.m. and sunrise, Peter suddenly stopped rowing and sat bolt upright. There<wbr />—across the waves—<wbr />something was moving! Was it the spray of the waves catching the moonlight? No, it was too steady, too upright. It was a man! Yes, a man, and he was walking on the surface of the sea! As the figure neared, it looked as though he was going to walk right by them. Terrified, the disciples thought it was some kind of apparition. The man spoke: “Take courage, it is I; have no fear.” It was Jesus!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Matt. 14:25-28</a>.</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Peter responded: “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you over the waters.” His first impulse was a courageous one. Full of excitement at this unique miracle, Peter sought to have his faith further confirmed. He wanted to be part of the action. Kindly, Jesus beckoned him. Peter clambered over the side of the vessel and down onto the undulating surface of the sea. Imagine Peter’s sensation as he found solid footing beneath him and then stood on top of the waters. He must have been filled with wonder as he made his way toward Jesus. However, another impulse soon welled up in him.<wbr />—<strong><em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77"><strong><em>Matthew 14:29</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em></strong></p>
<p class="qu"><strong>20. </strong>(a) How did Peter lose his focus, and with what result? (b) What lesson did Jesus drive home to Peter?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Peter needed to keep his focus on Jesus. It was Jesus, using the power of Jehovah, who was keeping Peter above the wind-swept waves. And Jesus was doing so in response to Peter’s faith in him. But Peter got distracted. We read: “Looking at the windstorm, he got afraid.” Peter took in an eyeful of those waves crashing against the boat, tossing spray and foam to the wind, and he panicked. He probably imagined himself sinking in that lake, drowning there. As fear rose in his heart, his faith sank. The man who had been named Rock because of his potential for steadiness began to sink like a stone because of his wavering faith. Peter was an able swimmer, but he did not rely on that ability now. He cried out: “Lord, save me!” Jesus caught him by the hand and pulled him up. Then, while still on the water’s surface, he drove home this important lesson to Peter: “You with little faith, why did you give way to doubt?”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Matt. 14:30, 31</a>.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>21. </strong>Why is doubt dangerous, and how can we fight against it?</p>
<p class="p26"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>“Give way to doubt”<wbr />—what an apt phrase! Doubt can be a powerful, destructive force. If we yield to it, it can eat away at our faith and cause us to sink spiritually. We need to fight back vigorously! How? By keeping the right focus. If we dwell on what scares us, what discourages us, what distracts us from Jehovah and his Son, we will find our doubts growing. If we focus on Jehovah and his Son, on what they have done, are doing, and will do for those who love them, we will keep corrosive doubts at bay.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>22. </strong>Why is Peter’s faith worth imitating?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>As Peter followed Jesus up into the boat, he saw the storm die down. Quiet fell on the Sea of Galilee. Peter joined his fellow disciples in declaring: “You are really God’s Son.” (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Matt. 14:33</a>) As dawn broke over the lake, Peter’s heart must have soared. He repudiated doubt and fear. Granted, he had a long way to go before he became the rocklike Christian that Jesus foresaw. But he was determined to keep trying, to keep growing. Do you have such determination? You will find that Peter’s faith is worth imitating.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:4, 5)</strong> When he stopped speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and let down your nets for a catch.” <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But in reply Simon said: “Instructor, we toiled all night and caught nothing, but at your word I will lower the nets.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:6-9)</strong> Well, when they did this, they caught* a great number of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them, and they came and filled both boats, so that these began to sink. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, Lord, because I am a sinful man.” <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>For both he and those with him were overwhelmed with astonishment at the catch of fish they had taken,</p><p></p><p>Lit., “enclosed.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:10, 11)</strong> and the same was true of both James and John, Zebʹe·dee’s sons, who were partners with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men* alive.” <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.</p><p></p><p>Or “people.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 55:7)</strong> Let the wicked man leave his way And the evil man his thoughts; Let him return to Jehovah, who will have mercy on him, To our God, for he will forgive in a large way.*</p><p></p><p>Or “will freely forgive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 6:33)</strong> “Keep on, then, seeking first the Kingdom and his righteousness, and all these other things will be added to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:11)</strong> So they brought the boats back to land and abandoned everything and followed him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 22:4, 5)</strong> In you our fathers put their trust; They trusted, and you kept rescuing them.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>To you they cried out, and they were saved; They trusted in you, and they were not disappointed.*</p><p></p><p>Or “were not put to shame.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 14:25-28)</strong> But in the fourth watch of the night* he came to them, walking on the sea. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When they caught sight of him walking on the sea, the disciples were troubled, saying: “It is an apparition!” And they cried out in their fear. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>But at once Jesus spoke to them, saying: “Take courage! It is I; do not be afraid.” <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Peter answered him: “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you over the waters.”</p><p></p><p>That is, about 3:00 a.m. until sunrise at about 6:00 a.m.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 19</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 14:29)</strong> He said: “Come!” So Peter got out of the boat and walked over the waters and went toward Jesus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 20</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 14:30, 31)</strong> But looking at the windstorm, he became afraid. And when he started to sink, he cried out: “Lord, save me!” <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Immediately stretching out his hand, Jesus caught hold of him and said to him: “You with little faith, why did you give way to doubt?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 22</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 14:33)</strong> Then those in the boat did obeisance* to him, saying: “You really are God’s Son.”</p><p></p><p>Or “bowed down.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***ia chap. 21 He Fought Against Fear and Doubt***</strong></a></p>
<div class="blockTeach"><aside><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>TO THINK ABOUT . . .</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><ul><li><p class="p29">  How did Peter overcome his doubts about following Jesus?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p30">  How did Jesus show that he saw the good in Peter?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p31">  On the Sea of Galilee, what did Peter learn about giving way to doubt?</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p32">  In what ways would you like to imitate Peter’s faith?</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016285.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***sn song 29 Walking in Integrity***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 29</p>
<h1><strong>Walking in Integrity</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">Psalm 26</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Please, judge me, Lord, observe my loyalty;</p>
<p class="p5">Observe my trust in you and my integrity.</p>
<p class="p6">Examine me, and put me to the test;</p>
<p class="p7">My mind and heart refine, that my soul might be blessed</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">But as for me, Determined I shall be</p>
<p class="p10">to walk eternally In my integrity<em>.</em></p>
</div>
<p class="p11">2. I do not sit with wicked men of lies.</p>
<p class="p12">I hate the company of those who truth despise.</p>
<p class="p13">With evil men, take not away my life;</p>
<p class="p14">My soul, with those whose hands are full of bribes and strife.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p15">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p16">But as for me, Determined I shall be</p>
<p class="p17">to walk eternally In my integrity<em>.</em></p>
</div>
<p class="p18">3. For I have loved the dwelling of your house.</p>
<p class="p19">Your worship, oh, so pure, I daily will espouse.</p>
<p class="p20">And I will march around your altar grand,</p>
<p class="p21">To make thanksgiving heard aloud throughout the land.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p22">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p23">But as for me, Determined I shall be</p>
<p class="p24">to walk eternally In my integrity<em>.</em></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p25">(See also <span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Ps. 25:2</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(Ps. 26:0-12)</strong></a> Of David. <strong>26 </strong>Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in my integrity; In Jehovah I have trusted without wavering.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Examine me, O Jehovah, and put me to the test; Refine my innermost thoughts* and my heart.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For your loyal love is always in front of me, And I walk in your truth.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I do not associate* with deceitful men, And I avoid those who hide what they are.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I hate the company of evil men, And I refuse to associate* with the wicked.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I will wash my hands in innocence, And I will march around your altar, O Jehovah,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>To cause the sound of thanksgiving to be heard And to declare all your wonderful works.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Jehovah, I love the house where you dwell, The place where your glory resides.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not sweep me* away with sinners Nor take my life away with violent men,* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Whose hands engage in shameful conduct, And whose right hand is full of bribes. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will walk in my integrity. Rescue* me and show me favor. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>My foot is standing on level ground; In the great congregation,* I will praise Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “my deepest emotions.” Lit., “my kidneys.”</p><p>Lit., “sit.”</p><p>Or “I do not mingle with hypocrites.”</p><p>Lit., “sit.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “with men of bloodshed.”</p><p>Lit., “Redeem.”</p><p>Lit., “In assemblies.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Ps. 25:2)</strong></a> My God, I trust in you; Do not let me be put to shame. Do not let my enemies gloat over me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
