<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 8/16 Remain in the Secret Place of the Most High</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016283.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 87:0-91:16)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. A song. <strong>87 </strong>His city’s foundation is in the holy mountains.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Jehovah loves the gates of Zion More than all the tents of Jacob.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Glorious things are being said about you, O city of the true God. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will count Raʹhab and Babylon among those who know* me; Here are Phi·lisʹti·a and Tyre, together with Cush. It will be said: “This is one who was born there.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>And about Zion it will be said: “Each and every one was born in her.” And the Most High will firmly establish her.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Jehovah will declare, when recording the peoples: “This is one who was born there.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Singers and those performing circle dances will say: “All my springs are in you.”* </p><p>A song. A melody of the sons of Korʹah. To the director; in the style of Maʹha·lath,* to be sung alternately. Masʹkil* of Heʹman the Ezʹra·hite. <strong>88 </strong>O Jehovah, the God of my salvation, By day I cry out, And by night I come before you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Let my prayer come to you, Incline your ear* to my cry for help.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For my soul* has been filled with calamity, And my life is on the brink of the Grave.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I am already counted among those going down to the pit;* I have become a helpless man,*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Left among the dead Like the slain lying in a grave, Whom you remember no longer And who have been separated from your care.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You have put me in the lowest pit, In dark places, in a large abyss.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Your rage weighs heavily on me, And you overwhelm me with your crashing waves. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You have driven my acquaintances far away from me; You have made me something detestable to them. I am trapped and cannot escape.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>My eye is worn out because of my affliction. I call on you, O Jehovah, all day long; To you I spread out my hands. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Will you perform wonders for the dead? Can those powerless in death rise up to praise you? (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Will your loyal love be declared in the grave, Your faithfulness in the place of destruction?* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Will your wonders be known in the darkness Or your righteousness in the land of oblivion? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But I still cry to you for help, O Jehovah, Each morning my prayer comes before you. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Why, O Jehovah, do you reject me?* Why do you hide your face from me? <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>From my youth on, I have been afflicted and ready to perish; I am numb from the terrible things you allow me to suffer. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your burning anger overwhelms me; Your terrors destroy me. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>They surround me like waters all day long; They close in on me from all sides.* <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>You have driven my friends and companions far away from me; Darkness has become my companion. </p><p>Masʹkil.* Of Eʹthan the Ezʹra·hite. <strong>89 </strong>I will sing about Jehovah’s expressions of loyal love forever. With my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For I have said: “Loyal love will be built up* forever, And you have firmly established your faithfulness in the heavens.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have sworn to David my servant:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>‘I will firmly establish your offspring* forever, And I will build up your throne for all generations.’” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The heavens praise your marvels, O Jehovah, Yes, your faithfulness in the congregation of the holy ones.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For who in the skies can compare to Jehovah? Who among the sons of God is like Jehovah?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God is held in awe in the council* of holy ones; He is grand and awe-inspiring to all who are around him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, Who is mighty like you, O Jah? Your faithfulness surrounds you.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You rule over the raging of the sea; When its waves surge, you calm them. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You have crushed Raʹhab like one who is slain. With your strong arm you have scattered your enemies. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The heavens are yours, and the earth is yours; The productive land and what fills it—you have founded them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The north and the south—you created them; Taʹbor and Herʹmon joyously praise your name. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Your arm is mighty; Your hand is strong; Your right hand is exalted. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne; Loyal love and faithfulness stand before you. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Happy are the people who know the joyful shouting. O Jehovah, they walk in the light of your face. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>They rejoice in your name all day long, And in your righteousness they are exalted. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>For you are the glory of their strength, And by your approval our strength* is exalted. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For our shield belongs to Jehovah, Our king belongs to the Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>At that time you spoke in a vision to your loyal ones and said: “I have granted strength to a mighty one; I have exalted a chosen one from among the people. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I have found David my servant; With my holy oil I have anointed him. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My hand will support him, And my arm will strengthen him. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>No enemy will exact tribute from him, And no unrighteous man will oppress him. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>I will crush to pieces his adversaries from before him And strike down those who hate him. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My faithfulness and loyal love are with him, And in my name his strength* will be exalted. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>I will put his hand* over the sea And his right hand over the rivers. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He will call out to me: ‘You are my Father, My God and the Rock of my salvation.’ <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And I will place him as firstborn, The highest of the kings of the earth. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>I will maintain my loyal love for him forever, And my covenant with him will never fail. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>I will establish his offspring* forever And make his throne as enduring as the heavens. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>If his sons leave my law And do not walk according to my decrees,* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>If they violate my statutes And do not keep my commandments, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Then I will punish their disobedience* with a rod And their error with flogging. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>But I will never abandon my loyal love for him Nor be untrue to my promise.* <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>I will not violate my covenant Or change what my lips have spoken. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>I have sworn in my holiness, once and for all; I will not tell lies to David. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>His offspring* will endure forever; His throne will endure like the sun before me. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Like the moon, it will be firmly established forever As a faithful witness in the skies.” (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>But you yourself have cast off and rejected him; You have become furious with your anointed one. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>You have spurned the covenant with your servant; You have profaned his crown* by throwing it to the ground. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>You have broken down all his stone walls;* You have reduced his fortifications to ruins. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>All who pass by have pillaged him; He is a reproach to his neighbors. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>You have made his adversaries victorious;* You have caused all his enemies to rejoice. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>You have also driven back his sword, And you have made him lose ground in the battle. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>You have brought an end to his splendor And hurled his throne to the ground. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>You have cut short the days of his youth; You have clothed him with shame. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>How long, O Jehovah, will you hide yourself? Will it be forever? Will your rage continue to burn like a fire? <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Remember how short my life is! Was it to no purpose that you created all humans? <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>What man can live and never see death? Can he save himself* from the power of the Grave?* (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>Where are your former acts of loyal love, O Jehovah, That you swore about to David in your faithfulness? <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>Remember, O Jehovah, the taunts hurled at your servants; How I have to bear* the taunts of all the peoples; <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>How your enemies have hurled insults, O Jehovah; How they have insulted every footstep of your anointed one. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised forever. Amen and Amen. </p><p>A prayer of Moses, the man of the true God. <strong>90 </strong>O Jehovah, you have been our dwelling place* throughout all generations.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before the mountains were born Or you brought forth* the earth and the productive land, From everlasting to everlasting,* you are God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You make mortal man return to dust; You say: “Return, you sons of men.”  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For a thousand years are in your eyes just as yesterday when it is past, Just as a watch during the night.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You sweep them away; they become like mere sleep; In the morning they are like grass that sprouts.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In the morning it blossoms and is renewed, But by evening it withers and dries up.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For we are consumed by your anger And terrified by your rage.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You place our errors in front of you;* Our secrets are exposed by the light of your face.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Our days ebb* away because of your fury; And our years come to an end like a whisper.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The span of our life is 70 years, Or 80 if one is especially strong.* But they are filled with trouble and sorrow; They quickly pass by, and away we fly. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Who can fathom the power of your anger? Your fury is as great as the fear you deserve. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Teach us how to count our days So that we may acquire a heart of wisdom. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Return, O Jehovah! How long will this last? Have pity on your servants. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Satisfy us with your loyal love in the morning, So that we may shout joyfully and rejoice during all our days. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Make us rejoice in proportion to the days you have afflicted us, For as many years as we have experienced calamity. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>May your servants see your activity, And may their sons see your splendor. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May the favor of Jehovah our God be upon us; May you prosper* the work of our hands. Yes, prosper* the work of our hands. </p><p><strong>91 </strong>Anyone dwelling in the secret place of the Most High Will lodge under the shadow of the Almighty.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will say to Jehovah: “You are my refuge and my stronghold, My God in whom I trust.”  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For he will rescue you from the trap of the birdcatcher, From the destructive pestilence.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>With his pinions he will cover* you, And under his wings you will take refuge. His faithfulness will be a large shield and a protective wall.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You will not fear the terrors of the night, Nor the arrow that flies by day,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Nor the pestilence that stalks in the gloom, Nor the destruction that ravages at midday.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>A thousand will fall at your side And ten thousand at your right hand, But to you it will not come near.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You will only see it with your eyes As you witness the punishment* of the wicked.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Because you said: “Jehovah is my refuge,” You have made the Most High your dwelling;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>No disaster will befall you, And no plague will come near your tent. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For he will give his angels a command concerning you, To guard you in all your ways. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>They will carry you on their hands, So that you may not strike your foot against a stone. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>On the young lion and the cobra you will tread; You will trample underfoot the maned lion and the big snake. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>God said: “Because he has affection for me,* I will rescue him. I will protect him because he knows* my name. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He will call on me, and I will answer him. I will be with him in distress. I will rescue him and glorify him. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I will satisfy him with long life, And I will cause him to see my acts of salvation.”*</p><p></p><p>Or “acknowledge.”</p><p>Or “For me, you are the source of all things.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “grave.”</p><p>Or “like a man without strength.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Or “in Abaddon.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or possibly, “all at once.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “endure.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “assembly.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “authority.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “judgments.”</p><p>Or “rebellion.”</p><p>Lit., “Nor be false with my faithfulness.”</p><p>Lit., “seed.”</p><p>Or “diadem.”</p><p>Or “his shelters of stone.”</p><p>Lit., “lifted up the right hand of his adversaries.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “the hand of Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “carry in my bosom.”</p><p>Or possibly, “our refuge.”</p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “You are aware of our errors.”</p><p>Or “Our life ebbs.”</p><p>Or “a sigh.”</p><p>Or “because of special mightiness.”</p><p>Or “firmly establish.”</p><p>Or “firmly establish.”</p><p>Or “block approach to.”</p><p>Or “a bulwark.”</p><p>Lit., “retribution.”</p><p>Or possibly, “fortress; refuge.”</p><p>Lit., “he has joined himself to me.”</p><p>Or “acknowledges.”</p><p>Or “see salvation from me.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
