<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 July 18-24</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016248.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 74:0-78:72)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>74 </strong>Why, O God, have you rejected us forever? Why does your anger burn* against the flock of your pasture?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Remember the people* you acquired long ago, The tribe you redeemed as your inheritance. Remember Mount Zion, where you have resided.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins. The enemy has devastated everything in the holy place.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Your foes roared inside your meeting place.* They have set up their own banners as signs there.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They were like men wielding axes against a thick forest.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They broke up all its engravings with axes and iron bars.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They set your sanctuary on fire. They profaned the tabernacle bearing your name, casting it to the ground.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They and their offspring have said in their hearts: “All the meeting places of God* in the land must be burned.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>There are no signs for us to see; There is no longer any prophet, And no one among us knows how long this will last. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting? Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand? Draw it out of your bosom* and put an end to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But God is my King from long ago, The one performing acts of salvation on the earth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>You stirred up the sea with your strength; You smashed the heads of the sea monsters in the waters. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You crushed the heads of Le·viʹa·than;* You gave it as food to the people, to those inhabiting the deserts. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>You cut openings for the springs and the streams; You dried up ever-flowing rivers. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The day belongs to you, also the night. You made the light* and the sun. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>You set up all the boundaries of the earth; You made summer and winter. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Remember the enemy’s taunts, O Jehovah, How a foolish people treats your name with disrespect. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Do not surrender the life* of your turtledove to the wild beasts. Do not forget the life of your afflicted people forever. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Remember the covenant, For the dark places of the earth have become full of the haunts of violence. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May the crushed one not turn away disappointed; May the lowly and the poor praise your name. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Rise up, O God, and plead your legal case. Remember how the foolish taunt you all day long. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Do not forget what your foes are saying. The uproar of those who defy you is ascending constantly. </p><p>To the director. Set to the melody “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of Aʹsaph. A song. <strong>75 </strong>We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you; Your name is near, And people declare your wondrous works.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You say: “When I set a time, I judge with fairness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the earth and all its inhabitants were dissolved, It was I who kept its pillars firm.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,” And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Do not exalt your strength* up high Or speak with arrogance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For exaltation does not come From the east or the west or the south.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For there is a cup in Jehovah’s hand; The wine is foaming and is fully mixed. He will surely pour it out, And all the wicked of the earth will drink it, down to the dregs.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will proclaim it forever; I will sing praises* to the God of Jacob. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For he says: “I will cut off all the strength* of the wicked, But the strength* of the righteous will be exalted.” </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of Aʹsaph. A song. <strong>76 </strong>God is known in Judah; In Israel his name is great.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>His shelter is in Saʹlem, And his dwelling is in Zion.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>There he broke the flaming arrows of the bow, The shield and the sword and the weapons of war. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You shine brightly;* You are more majestic than the mountains of prey.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The courageous of heart have been plundered. They have fallen asleep; The warriors were all helpless.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>From your rebuke, O God of Jacob, Both the charioteer and the horse have fallen fast asleep.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>You alone are awe-inspiring. Who can withstand your intense anger?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>From heaven you pronounced judgment; The earth was afraid and was silent  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When God rose up to execute judgment, To save all the meek of the earth. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the rage of man will serve to your praise; With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make your vows to Jehovah your God and pay them, Let all who are around him bring their gift in fear. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He will humble the pride* of leaders; He inspires fear in the kings of the earth. </p><p>To the director; on Je·duʹthun.* Of Aʹsaph. A melody. <strong>77 </strong>With my voice I will cry out to God; To God I will cry out, and he will hear me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In the day of my distress I search for Jehovah. At night my hands are stretched out to him without ceasing.* I* cannot be comforted.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When I remember God, I groan; I am troubled and my strength fails.* (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You hold my eyelids open; I am agitated and cannot speak.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>My thoughts turn to the days of long ago, The years of the distant past.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>During the night I remember my song;* I ponder in my heart; I make* a diligent search.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Will Jehovah cast us off forever? Will he never again show his favor?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Has his loyal love ceased forever? Will his promise come to nothing for all generations?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Has God forgotten to show his favor, Or has his anger caused his mercy to cease? (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Must I keep saying: “This is what distresses me:* The Most High has changed his position* toward us”? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O God, your ways are holy. What god is as great as you, O God? <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You are the true God, who does marvelous things. You have revealed your strength to the peoples. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>With your power* you have rescued* your people, The sons of Jacob and of Joseph. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The waters saw you, O God; The waters saw you and were disturbed. And the deep waters became agitated. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The clouds poured down water. The cloudy skies thundered, And your arrows flew here and there. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The sound of your thunder was like chariot wheels; Flashes of lightning lit up the inhabited earth;* The earth trembled and quaked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Your way was through the sea, Your path through many waters; But your footprints could not be traced. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>You led your people just like a flock, In the care* of Moses and Aaron. </p><p>Masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>78 </strong>Listen, my people, to my law;* Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The things we have heard and know, Which our fathers have related to us,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We will not hide from their sons; We will relate to the generation to come The praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength, The wonderful things he has done.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established a reminder in Jacob And set a law in Israel; He commanded our forefathers To make these things known to their children,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that the next generation, The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s works But would observe his commandments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then they would not be like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation, A generation whose heart was unsteady* And whose spirit was not faithful to God.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow, But they retreated in the day of battle. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They challenged* God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Look! He struck a rock So that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread, Or can he provide meat for his people?” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>When Jehovah heard them, he became furious; A fire blazed against Jacob, And his anger flared up against Israel <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Because they did not put faith in God; They did not trust in his ability to save them. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So he commanded the cloudy skies above, And he opened the doors of heaven. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He kept raining down manna for them to eat; He gave them the grain of heaven. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Men ate the bread of mighty ones;* He provided enough to satisfy them. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He stirred up the east wind in the heavens And made a south wind blow by his power. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And he rained down meat on them like dust, Birds like the sand of the seashore. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He made them fall in the midst of his camp, All around his tents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>And they ate and gorged themselves; He gave them what they desired. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But before they fully satisfied their craving, While their food was yet in their mouth, <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>God’s wrath flared up against them. He put to death their strongest men; He brought down the young men of Israel. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Despite this they sinned even more And did not put faith in his wonderful works. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath, And their years by sudden terrors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>But as often as he killed them, they would search for him; They would return and look for God, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Remembering that God was their Rock And that the Most High God was their Redeemer.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But they tried to deceive him with their mouth And lied to him with their tongue. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Their heart was not steadfast toward him; And they were not faithful to his covenant. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>But he was merciful; He would forgive* their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his anger Instead of stirring up all his wrath. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>For he remembered that they were flesh, A wind that blows past and does not return.* <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert! <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>They did not remember his power,* The day that he rescued* them from the adversary, <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>How he displayed his signs in Egypt And his miracles in the region of Zoʹan, <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>And how he turned the Nile canals into blood So that they could not drink from their streams. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>He sent swarms of gadflies to devour them And frogs to bring them to ruin. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He gave their crops to the voracious locusts, The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>He destroyed their vines with hail And their sycamore trees with hailstones. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>He gave their beasts of burden over to the hail And their livestock to the lightning bolts.* <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>He inflicted his burning anger on them, Fury and indignation and distress, Companies of angels bringing calamity. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>He cleared a pathway for his anger. He did not spare them* from death; And he gave them* over to pestilence. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt, The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>Then he brought his people out like a flock And guided them like a drove in the wilderness. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>He led them in security, And they felt no fear; The sea covered their enemies. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>And he brought them to his holy territory, This mountainous region that his right hand acquired. <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>He drove out the nations from before them; He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line; He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>But they kept challenging* God the Most High, and rebelling against him; They did not pay attention to his reminders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers. They were as unreliable as a loose bow. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>They kept offending him with their high places, And they incited him to fury* with their carved images. <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>God heard and became furious, So he utterly rejected Israel. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh, The tent where he had resided among men. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity; His splendor into the hand of the adversary. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>He handed his people over to the sword And became furious with his inheritance. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>Fire consumed his young men, And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.* <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>His priests fell by the sword, And their own widows did not weep. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep, Like a mighty man waking up from wine. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>And he drove his adversaries back; He put them to lasting disgrace. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>He rejected the tent of Joseph; He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>But he chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which he loves. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens,* Like the earth that he has established forever. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>He chose David his servant And took him from the sheep pens, <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>From tending the nursing ewes; He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people, And over Israel, his inheritance. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>He shepherded them with integrity of heart, And with skillful hands he led them.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “smoke.”</p><p>Lit., “your assembly.”</p><p>Or “your place of assembly.”</p><p>Or “All places where God is worshipped.”</p><p>Or “from the folds of your garment.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the luminary.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Or “You are enveloped with light.”</p><p>Lit., “spirit.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “growing numb.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Lit., “my spirit faints.”</p><p>Or “string music.”</p><p>Lit., “My spirit makes.”</p><p>Or “pierces me.”</p><p>Lit., “right hand.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Lit., “By the hand.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “instruction.”</p><p>Lit., “unprepared.”</p><p>Or “wall.”</p><p>Lit., “tested.”</p><p>Or “food for their soul.”</p><p>Or “of angels.”</p><p>Or “Avenger.”</p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Or possibly, “That the spirit is going forth and does not come back.”</p><p>Or “pained.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the burning fever.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Lit., “their life.”</p><p>Or “testing.”</p><p>Or “to jealousy.”</p><p>Lit., “And his virgins were not praised.”</p><p>Lit., “He built his sanctuary like the heights.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016248.xhtml#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 78:1-21)</strong></a> <span id="citation9"></span>Listen, my people, to my law;* Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The things we have heard and know, Which our fathers have related to us,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We will not hide from their sons; We will relate to the generation to come The praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength, The wonderful things he has done.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established a reminder in Jacob And set a law in Israel; He commanded our forefathers To make these things known to their children,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that the next generation, The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s works But would observe his commandments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then they would not be like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation, A generation whose heart was unsteady* And whose spirit was not faithful to God.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow, But they retreated in the day of battle. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They challenged* God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Look! He struck a rock So that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread, Or can he provide meat for his people?” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>When Jehovah heard them, he became furious; A fire blazed against Jacob, And his anger flared up against Israel</p><p></p><p>Or “instruction.”</p><p>Lit., “unprepared.”</p><p>Or “wall.”</p><p>Lit., “tested.”</p><p>Or “food for their soul.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 110 God’s Wondrous Works***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 110</p>
<h1><strong>God’s Wondrous Works</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Psalm 139</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. O God, you know my rest and waking,</p>
<p class="p5">When I lie down and when I rise anew.</p>
<p class="p6">You search my thought, my inmost inclination,</p>
<p class="p7">The words I speak, the ways I walk,</p>
<p class="p8">you know them too.</p>
<p class="p9">You saw when I was made in secret,</p>
<p class="p10">My very bones not hidden from your sight.</p>
<p class="p11">You saw my form; its parts were down in writing.</p>
<p class="p12">I praise the wonder of your ways,</p>
<p class="p13">extol your might.</p>
<p class="p14">Your knowledge, God, is wondrous, fear-inspiring;</p>
<p class="p15">Of this my soul is very well aware.</p>
<p class="p16">If I should fear that darkness might enfold me,</p>
<p class="p17">Your spirit, God, would find me, even there.</p>
<p class="p18">Where could I hide from you, Jehovah,</p>
<p class="p19">Or be concealed, be hidden from your face?</p>
<p class="p20">Not in the heights nor in the depth of Sheol,</p>
<p class="p21">Not in the dark nor in the sea, there is no place.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p22">(See also <span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Ps. 66:3;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 94:19;</a><span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13"> Jer. 17:10</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Ps. 139:0-24)</strong></a> For the director. Of David. A melody. <strong>139 </strong>O Jehovah, you have searched through me, and you know me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You know when I sit down and when I rise up. You discern my thoughts from afar.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You observe* me when I travel and when I lie down; You are familiar with all my ways.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>There is not a word on my tongue, But look! O Jehovah, you already know it well.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Behind and before me, you surround me; And you lay your hand upon me.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Such knowledge is beyond my comprehension.* It is too high for me to reach.*  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Where can I escape from your spirit, And where can I run away from your face?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there, And if I were to make my bed in the Grave,* look! you would be there.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>If I would fly away with the wings of the dawn To reside by the most remote sea, <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Even there your hand would lead me And your right hand would take hold of me. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If I say: “Surely darkness will conceal me!” Then the night around me would become light. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Even the darkness would not be too dark for you, But night would be as bright as the day; Darkness is the same as light to you. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For you produced my kidneys; You kept me screened off* in my mother’s womb. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know* this very well. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My bones were not hidden from you When I was made in secret, When I was woven in the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Your eyes even saw me as an embryo; All its parts were written in your book Regarding the days when they were formed, Before any of them existed. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>So to me, how precious your thoughts are! O God, how vast is the sum of them! <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O God, if only you would slay the wicked! Then the violent* men would depart from me, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Those who say things against you with evil intent;* They are your adversaries who take up your name in a worthless way. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do I not hate those who hate you, O Jehovah, And loathe those who revolt against you? <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I have nothing but hatred for them; They have become real enemies to me. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Search through me, O God, and know my heart. Examine me, and know my anxious* thoughts. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>See whether there is in me any harmful way, And lead me in the way of eternity.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “measure.”</p><p>Or “is too amazing for me.”</p><p>Or “too much for me to fathom.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “wove me together.”</p><p>Or “My soul knows.”</p><p>Or possibly, “I would still be counting them.”</p><p>Or “bloodguilty.”</p><p>Or “according to their idea.”</p><p>Or “disquieting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Ps. 66:3)</strong></a> Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are! Because of your great power, Your enemies will cringe before you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 94:19)</strong></a> When anxieties* overwhelmed me,* You comforted and soothed me.*</p><p></p><p>Or “disquieting thoughts.”</p><p>Or “became many inside of me.”</p><p>Or “Your consolations soothed my soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Jer. 17:10)</strong></a> I, Jehovah, am searching the heart, Examining the innermost thoughts,* To give to each one according to his ways, According to the fruitage of his works.</p><p></p><p>Or “deepest emotions.” Lit., “kidneys.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w15 8/15 p. 10 Meditate on Jehovah’s Enduring Love***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>3. </strong>What can help us to strengthen our conviction that Jehovah’s love for us is enduring?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The individuals quoted earlier were certain that God was with them in trying times. We too can have the conviction that he is on our side. (<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Ps. 118:6, 7</a>) This article focuses on how God’s love is evident in connection with (1) his creative works, (2) his inspired Word, (3) prayer, and (4) the ransom. Meditating on the good things Jehovah has done will very likely increase our gratitude for his enduring love.<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15"><strong>Psalm 77:11, 12</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
<h2><strong>MEDITATE ON JEHOVAH’S CREATIVE WORKS</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>4. </strong>What does meditation on Jehovah’s creative works reveal?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Can we see Jehovah’s enduring love for us in what he has created? Yes, we can because the very act of creation was a manifestation of God’s love. (<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Rom. 1:20</a>) He designed the earth with an ecosystem in which we can safely exist and thrive. However, he wants us to do more than merely exist. We need to eat to keep on living. Jehovah made sure that the earth could produce a seemingly endless variety of plants that can be prepared as wholesome food. Why, he even made eating a delightful and satisfying experience! (<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Eccl. 9:7</a>) A sister named Catherine finds great pleasure in observing creation, especially during the invigorating spring season in Canada. She remarks: “It is truly amazing how everything comes to life<wbr />—flowers that are programmed to pop out of the ground and birds that return from their migration, including the tiny hummingbird that finds its way to the bird feeder outside my kitchen window. Jehovah must love us to give us so much delight.” Our loving heavenly Father takes pleasure in his creative works, and he wants us to enjoy them as well.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Acts 14:16, 17</a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 118:6, 7)</strong> Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Jehovah is on my side as my helper;* I will look in triumph on those who hate me.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “along with those helping me.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 77:11, 12)</strong> I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:20)</strong> For his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 9:7)</strong> Go, eat your food with rejoicing, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for already the true God has found pleasure in your works.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Acts 14:16, 17)</strong> In past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>although he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, satisfying you with food and filling your hearts with gladness.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w04 3/1 pp. 19-20 How We Show Our Love for God***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>How We Show Our Love for God</strong></p>
<p class="p2">CULTIVATING love for God is not an academic exercise. As God’s servants around the world can testify, true love for God grows as one becomes acquainted with his personality, and it becomes even stronger as one gets familiar with what he loves, what he hates, and what his preferences and his requirements are.</p>
<p class="p3">Lovingly, Jehovah has given us his Word, the Bible, in which he reveals himself. From it, we learn how Jehovah dealt with different situations. Just as a letter from a loved one gives us much pleasure, so the Bible brings us delight as we see new aspects of Jehovah’s personality revealed.</p>
<p class="p4">However, as we at times notice in our public ministry, learning about God does not always cause a person to love him. Jesus said to certain unappreciative Jews of his day: “You are searching the Scriptures, because you think that by means of them you will have everlasting life; . . . but I well know that you do not have the love of God in you.” (<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">John 5:39,</a><span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20"> 42</a>) Some spend years learning about Jehovah’s loving deeds and yet have little love for him. Why? They fail to contemplate the implications of what they learn. In contrast, millions of sincere people with whom we study the Bible experience that their love for God continues to grow. Why? Because, as we ourselves did, they follow Asaph’s example. In what way?</p>
<p class="p5"><strong>Meditate Appreciatively</strong></p>
<p class="p6">Asaph resolved to cultivate love for Jehovah in his heart. He wrote: “With my heart I will show concern . . . I shall remember the practices of Jah; for I will remember your marvelous doing of long ago. And I shall certainly meditate on all your activity, and with your dealings I will concern myself.” (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Psalm 77:6,</a><span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22"> 11, 12</a>) Love for God will grow in the heart of one who ponders Jehovah’s ways as the psalmist did.</p>
<p class="p7">In addition, recalling experiences that we have enjoyed while serving Jehovah strengthens our relationship with him. The apostle Paul said that we are God’s “fellow workers,” and the friendship that may grow between fellow workers is very special. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">1 Corinthians 3:9</a>) When we express our love for Jehovah, he appreciates it, and it makes his heart glad. (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Proverbs 27:11</a>) Then, when we ask for Jehovah’s help and he guides us through some difficulty, we know that he is with us, and our love for him deepens.</p>
<p class="p8">Friendship between two people develops as they express their feelings to each other. Similarly, when we tell Jehovah why we are devoted to him, we are strengthened in our love for him. We will find ourselves reflecting on Jesus’ words: “You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.” (<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Mark 12:30</a>) What can we do to make sure that we will continue to love Jehovah with our whole heart, our whole soul, our whole mind, and our whole strength?</p>
<p class="p9"><strong>Loving Jehovah With Our Whole Heart</strong></p>
<p class="p10">The Scriptures refer to the figurative heart, which is the inner person<wbr />—our desires, attitudes, and feelings. So loving Jehovah with our whole heart means that more than anything else, we desire to please God. (<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Psalm 86:11</a>) We show that we have such love by making our personality acceptable to him. We strive to imitate God by ‘abhorring what is wicked and clinging to what is good.’<wbr />—<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Romans 12:9</a>.</p>
<p class="p11">Our love for God affects our feelings about everything. For example, we may find our employment to be challenging or absorbing, but is this where our heart is? No. Since we love Jehovah with our whole heart, we are first of all ministers of God. Likewise, we want to please our parents, our marriage mate, and our boss, but we prove our wholehearted love for Jehovah by seeking above all to please him. After all, he deserves first place in our heart.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Matthew 6:24;</a><span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29"> 10:37</a>.</p>
<p class="p12"><strong>Loving Jehovah With Our Whole Soul</strong></p>
<p class="p13">In the Scriptures the word “soul” basically refers to our entire person as well as to the life we possess. So loving Jehovah</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(John 5:39)</strong></a> “You are searching the Scriptures because you think that you will have everlasting life by means of them; and these are the very ones* that bear witness about me.</p><p></p><p>That is, the Scriptures.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(John 5:42)</strong></a> but I well know that you do not have the love of God in you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Ps. 77:6)</strong></a> During the night I remember my song;* I ponder in my heart; I make* a diligent search.</p><p></p><p>Or “string music.”</p><p>Lit., “My spirit makes.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Ps. 77:11, 12)</strong></a> I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 3:9)</strong></a> For we are God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong></a> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Mark 12:30)</strong></a> and you must love Jehovah* your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul* and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Ps. 86:11)</strong></a> Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart* to fear your name.</p><p></p><p>Or “Give me an undivided heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Rom. 12:9)</strong></a> Let your love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is wicked; cling to what is good.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:24)</strong></a> “No one can slave for two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. You cannot slave for God and for Riches.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:37)</strong></a> Whoever has greater affection for father or mother than for me is not worthy of me; and whoever has greater affection for son or daughter than for me is not worthy of me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w03 7/1 pp. 10-11 “Look! This Is Our God”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu">6, 7. How powerful is the sun, and to what important truth does it testify?</p>
<p class="p10"><sup>6 </sup>When you stand outside on a bright summer day, what do you feel on your skin? The warmth of the sun. Really, though, you are feeling the results of Jehovah’s creative power. How powerful is the sun? At its core, its temperature is about 27 million degrees Fahrenheit <strong>[15 million degrees Celsius]</strong>. If you could take a pinhead-sized piece of the sun’s core and put it here on the earth, you could not safely stand within 90 miles <strong>[140 km] </strong>of that tiny heat source! Every second, the sun emits energy equivalent to the explosion of many hundreds of millions of nuclear bombs. Yet, the earth orbits at just the right distance from that awesome thermonuclear furnace. Too close, and earth’s water would vaporize; too far, and it would all freeze. Either extreme would render our planet lifeless.</p>
<p class="p11"><sup>7 </sup>Although their very lives depend upon the sun, many people take it for granted. Thus, they miss what the sun can teach us. <span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">Psalm 74:16</a> says of Jehovah: “You . . . prepared the luminary, even the sun.” Yes, the sun glorifies Jehovah, “the Maker of heaven and earth.” (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Psalm 146:6</a>) Even so, it is just one of the numerous creations that teach us about Jehovah’s immense power. The more we learn about Jehovah’s creative power, the more profound our awe becomes.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 74:16)</strong> The day belongs to you, also the night. You made the light* and the sun.</p><p></p><p>Or “the luminary.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 146:6)</strong> The Maker of heaven and earth, Of the sea, and of all that is in them, The One who always remains faithful,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w06 7/15 p. 11 par. 2 Highlights From Books Three and Four of Psalms***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p12"><span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32"><strong>75:4, 5,</strong></a><span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33"> <strong>10</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—What is signified by the term “horn”? </strong>The horns of an animal are a powerful weapon. Hence, the term “horn” figuratively denotes power, or strength. Jehovah raises up the horns of his people, causing them to be exalted, whereas he ‘cuts down the horns of the wicked ones.’ We are warned against ‘exalting our horn on high’ in that we should not take on a proud or arrogant attitude. Since Jehovah does the exalting, assignments of responsibility in the congregation are to be viewed as coming from him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Psalm 75:7</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 75:4, 5)</strong> I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,” And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Do not exalt your strength* up high Or speak with arrogance.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 75:10)</strong> For he says: “I will cut off all the strength* of the wicked, But the strength* of the righteous will be exalted.”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 75:7)</strong> For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***it-1 p. 1160 Humility***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p23">All, men and women, should be submissive to those taking the lead and should wait on Jehovah for any appointments or assignments to responsibility, for it is from him that promotion comes. (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Ps 75:6, 7</a>) As some of the Levite sons of Korah said: “I have chosen to stand at the threshold in the house of my God rather than to move around in the tents of wickedness.” (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Ps 84:10</a>) Such true humility takes time to develop. The Scriptures, in setting forth the qualifications for one who would be appointed to the office of overseer, specify that a newly converted man should not be appointed, “for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed upon the Devil.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">1Ti 3:6</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Ps. 75:6, 7)</strong></a> For exaltation does not come From the east or the west or the south.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Ps. 84:10)</strong></a> For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else! I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my God Rather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(1 Tim. 3:6)</strong></a> not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up with pride and fall into the judgment passed on the Devil.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w04 4/1 pp. 21-22 Are You Focusing on the Reward?***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p8">(<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">2 Peter 3:9</a>) If we trust in Jehovah, he will help us to attain our goal. Indeed, it is contrary to his nature to search for reasons to disqualify those sincerely trying to please him.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Psalm 103:8-11;</a><span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40"> 130:3, 4;</a><span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41"> Ezekiel 18:32</a>.</p>
<p class="p9">Knowing how Jehovah feels toward his people gives us hope<wbr />—a quality of equal importance to faith. (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">1 Corinthians 13:13</a>) The Greek word translated “hope” in the Bible carries the idea of an eager “expectation of good.” With such hope in mind, the apostle Paul wrote: “We desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end, in order that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.” (<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Hebrews 6:11, 12</a>) Notice that if we continue to serve Jehovah faithfully, we can be <em>assured </em>of realizing our hope. Unlike many worldly aspirations, this hope “does not lead to disappointment.” (<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Romans 5:5</a>) So how can we keep our hope bright and in sharp focus?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong>How to Sharpen Our Spiritual Focus</strong></p>
<p class="p11">Our physical eyes cannot focus on two things at the same time. The same is true of our spiritual vision. Focusing on things of the present system will surely put God’s promised new world somewhat out of focus in our minds. In time, this blurred, peripheral image may lose its appeal and simply disappear from view. What a tragedy that would be! (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Luke 21:34</a>) How important, therefore, that we keep a ‘simple eye’<wbr />—one that stays focused on God’s Kingdom and the reward of everlasting life!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Matthew 6:22</a>.</p>
<p class="p12">Keeping a simple eye is not always easy. Day-to-day problems demand our attention, and distractions<wbr />—even temptations—<wbr />may lie in our path. Under these circumstances, how can we stay focused on the Kingdom and God’s promised new world without neglecting other necessary activities? Let us consider three ways.</p>
<p class="p13"><em>Study God’s Word daily. </em>Regular reading of the Bible and study of Bible-based publications help us to keep our minds centered on spiritual matters. True, we may have been studying God’s Word for years, but we must continue to study it, just as we need to keep eating physical food in order to sustain our lives. We do not stop eating simply because we have eaten thousands of meals in the past. So regardless of how familiar we are with the Bible, we need an ongoing, regular intake of spiritual nourishment from it in order to keep our hope bright and our faith and love strong.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Psalm 1:1-3</a>.</p>
<p class="p14"><em>Meditate appreciatively on God’s Word. </em>Why is meditation essential? For two reasons. First, meditation enables us to assimilate what we read and to develop heart appreciation for it. Second, meditation prevents us from forgetting Jehovah, his wonderful works, and the hope he has set before us. To illustrate: The Israelites who left Egypt with Moses saw with their own eyes displays of Jehovah’s awesome power. They also felt his loving protection as he led them toward their inheritance. Yet, no sooner did the Israelites reach the wilderness en route to the Promised Land than they began to complain, revealing a serious lack of faith. (<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Psalm 78:11-17</a>) What was their problem?</p>
<p class="p15">The people shifted their focus from Jehovah and the wonderful hope he set before them to their immediate comforts and fleshly concerns. Despite the miraculous signs and wonders they had personally witnessed, many Israelites became faithless complainers. “Quickly they <em>forgot </em>[Jehovah’s] works,” says <span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Psalm 106:13</a>. Such inexcusable negligence cost that generation entry into the Promised Land.</p>
<p class="p16">Thus, when reading the Scriptures or Bible study aids, take time to meditate on what you read. Such reflection is vital to your spiritual health and growth. For example, when reading <span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">Psalm 106</a>, quoted above in part, meditate on Jehovah’s qualities. Observe how patient and merciful he was with the Israelites. See how he did all he possibly could to help them reach the Promised Land. Note how they continually rebelled against him. Feel Jehovah’s anguish and pain as his mercy and patience were stretched to the very limit by a people who were callously unappreciative. Further, by meditating on <span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Ps 106 verses 30 and 31</a>, which describe Phinehas’ firm, courageous stand for righteousness, we are assured that Jehovah does not forget his loyal ones and that he rewards them abundantly.</p>
<p class="p17"><em>Apply Bible principles in your life. </em>As we follow Bible principles, we see for ourselves that Jehovah’s counsel works. <span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Proverbs 3:5, 6</a> says: “Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding. In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.” Think about how the immoral ways of many people have caused a backlash of mental, emotional, and physical problems. By indulging in momentary pleasures, such people reap years<wbr />—even a lifetime—<wbr />of woe. In sharp contrast, those who walk the ‘cramped road’ get a foretaste of new system living, and this encourages them to continue on the path to life.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Matthew 7:13, 14;</a><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"> Psalm 34:8</a>.</p>
<p class="p18">Applying Bible principles can be a challenge. At times, an unscriptural solution may seem to promise immediate relief in a trying situation. During times of financial difficulty, for example, it may be tempting</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 3:9)</strong></a> Jehovah* is not slow concerning his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with you because he does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Ps. 103:8-11)</strong></a> Jehovah is merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love.*  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He will not always find fault, Nor will he stay resentful forever. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Nor has he repaid us what our errors deserve. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For as the heavens are higher than the earth, So great is his loyal love toward those who fear him.</p><p></p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “loving-kindness.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Ps. 130:3, 4)</strong></a> If errors were what you watch,* O Jah,* Then who, O Jehovah, could stand?  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For with you there is true forgiveness, So that you may be held in awe.*</p><p></p><p>Or “keep track of.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “be feared.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Ezek. 18:32)</strong></a> “‘I do not take any pleasure in the death of anyone,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘So turn back and live.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 13:13)</strong></a> Now, however, these three remain: faith, hope, love; but the greatest of these is love.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Heb. 6:11, 12)</strong></a> But we desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>so that you may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Rom. 5:5)</strong></a> and the hope does not lead to disappointment; because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, which was given to us.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Luke 21:34)</strong></a> “But pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon you</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:22)</strong></a> “The lamp of the body is the eye. If, then, your eye is focused,* your whole body will be bright.*</p><p></p><p>Or “clear.” Lit., “simple.”</p><p>Or “full of light.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Ps. 1:1-3)</strong></a> Happy is the man who does not walk according to the advice of the wicked And does not stand on the path of sinners And does not sit in the seat of scoffers.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, And he reads His law in an undertone* day and night.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>He will be like a tree planted by streams of water, A tree that produces fruit in its season, The foliage of which does not wither. And everything he does will succeed.</p><p></p><p>Or “he meditates on His law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Ps. 78:11-17)</strong></a> They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert;</p><p></p><p>Or “wall.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Ps. 106:13)</strong></a> But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(Ps. 106:1-48)</strong></a> Praise Jah!* Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good; His loyal love endures forever.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Who can fully declare Jehovah’s mighty acts Or proclaim all his praiseworthy deeds?  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Happy are those who act with justice, Who always do what is right.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Remember me, O Jehovah, when you show favor* toward your people. Take care of me with your acts of salvation,  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that I may enjoy the goodness you show your chosen ones, That I may rejoice along with your nation, That I may proudly praise* you along with your inheritance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>We have sinned just as our forefathers did; We have done wrong; we have acted wickedly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Our forefathers in Egypt did not appreciate* your wonderful works. They did not remember your abundant loyal love, But they rebelled at the sea, by the Red Sea.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>But he saved them for the sake of his name, To make his mightiness known.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; He led them through its depths as through a desert;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>He saved them from the hand of their foe And reclaimed them from the hand of the enemy. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The waters covered their adversaries; Not one of them survived.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Then they had faith in his promise; They began to sing his praise. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But they quickly forgot what he did; They did not wait for his counsel. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>They gave way to their selfish desires in the wilderness; They tested God in the desert. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave them what they requested, But then struck them with disease that made them* waste away. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>In the camp they grew jealous of Moses And of Aaron, the holy one of Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The earth then opened up and swallowed Daʹthan And covered those assembled with A·biʹram. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A fire blazed among their group; A flame consumed the wicked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>They made a calf in Hoʹreb And bowed down to a statue of metal;* <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>They exchanged my glory For the representation of a grass-eating bull. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>They forgot God their Savior, Who did great things in Egypt, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Wonderful works in the land of Ham, Awe-inspiring deeds at the Red Sea. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He was about to order their annihilation, But Moses his chosen one interceded with him* To avert his destructive anger. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Then they despised the desirable land; They had no faith in his promise. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>They kept grumbling in their tents; They did not listen to the voice of Jehovah. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>So he raised his hand in an oath concerning them That he would make them fall in the wilderness; <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>He would make their descendants fall among the nations, And he would scatter them throughout the lands. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Then they joined in worship of* Baʹal of Peʹor, And they ate sacrifices offered to the dead.* <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>They provoked Him by their actions, And a scourge broke out among them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened, The scourge was halted. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And it was counted to him as righteousness Through all generations forever. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>They provoked Him at the waters of Merʹi·bah,* And it went badly for Moses because of them. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>They embittered his spirit, And he spoke rashly with his lips. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>They did not annihilate the peoples, As Jehovah had commanded them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>But they mingled with the nations And adopted* their ways. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>They kept serving their idols, And these became a snare to them. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>They would sacrifice their sons And their daughters to demons. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>They kept spilling innocent blood, The blood of their own sons and daughters Whom they sacrificed to the idols of Caʹnaan; And the land was polluted with bloodshed. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>They became unclean by their works; They committed spiritual prostitution by their deeds. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>So the anger of Jehovah blazed against his people, And he grew to detest his inheritance. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>He repeatedly handed them over to the nations, So that those who hated them might rule over them. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Their enemies oppressed them, And they were subject to their power.* <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Many times he rescued them, But they would rebel and disobey, And they would be brought low for their error. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>But he would see their distress And hear their cry for help. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>For their sake he would remember his covenant, And he would feel pity,* moved by his great* loyal love. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He would cause them to be pitied By all who held them captive. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Save us, O Jehovah our God, And gather us from the nations So that we may give thanks to your holy name And exult in praising you.* <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>May Jehovah, the God of Israel, be praised Throughout all eternity.* And let all the people say, “Amen!”* Praise Jah!*</p><p></p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Or “goodwill.”</p><p>Or “may boast about.”</p><p>Or “grasp the meaning of.”</p><p>Or “wilderness.”</p><p>Or “was left.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Or “molten statue.”</p><p>Lit., “stood in the breach before him.”</p><p>Or “attached themselves to.”</p><p>That is, sacrifices offered either to dead people or to lifeless gods.</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Or “learned.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Or “feel regret.”</p><p>Or “abundant.”</p><p>Or “exult in your praise.”</p><p>Or “From eternity to eternity.”</p><p>Or “So be it!”</p><p>Or “Hallelujah!” “Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Ps. 106:30, 31)</strong></a> But when Phinʹe·has stood up and intervened, The scourge was halted. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And it was counted to him as righteousness Through all generations forever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong></a> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(Matt. 7:13, 14)</strong></a> “Go in through the narrow gate, because broad is the gate and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are going in through it; <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are finding it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <strong>(Ps. 34:8)</strong></a> Taste and see that Jehovah is good; Happy is the man who takes refuge in him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***w11 8/15 p. 11 They Waited for the Messiah***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p19"><strong>The Messiah’s Other Activities Foretold</strong></p>
<p class="qu">14. In what way was <span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55">Psalm 78:2</a> fulfilled by Jesus?</p>
<p class="p20"><sup>14 </sup><em>The Messiah would speak in parables, or illustrations. </em>The psalmist Asaph sang: “In a proverbial saying I will open my mouth.” (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Ps. 78:2</a>) How do we know that this prophetically applied to Jesus? Matthew tells us so. After relating illustrations in which Jesus likened the Kingdom to a developing mustard grain and to leaven, Matthew states: “Without an illustration [Jesus] would not speak to them; that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet who said: ‘I will open my mouth with illustrations, I will publish things hidden since the founding.’” (<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Matt. 13:31-35</a>) Proverbial sayings, or parables, were among Jesus’ effective means of teaching.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(Ps. 78:2)</strong></a> I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:2)</strong> I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 13:31-35)</strong> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like a mustard grain that a man took and planted in his field. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>It is, in fact, the tiniest of all the seeds, but when it has grown, it is the largest of the vegetable plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and find lodging among its branches.” <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He told them another illustration: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like leaven that a woman took and mixed with three large measures of flour until the whole mass was fermented.” <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds by illustrations. Indeed, without an illustration he would not speak to them, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>in order to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet who said: “I will open my mouth with illustrations; I will proclaim things hidden since the founding.”*</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “the founding of the world.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***w12 11/1 p. 14 The Bible Changes Lives***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p43">As I studied the Bible, my view of God changed completely. I learned that he is not the cause of wickedness and suffering and that he himself is hurt when people do bad things. (<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Genesis 6:6;</a><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"> Psalm 78:40, 41</a>) I became quite determined to try never to cause Jehovah any hurt. I wanted to make his heart rejoice. (<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Proverbs 27:11</a>) I stopped overdrinking and using tobacco, and I quit engaging in immorality. In March 1994, I was baptized as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Gen. 6:6)</strong></a> Jehovah regretted* that he had made men on the earth, and his heart was saddened.*</p><p></p><p>Or “was grieved.”</p><p>Or “and he felt hurt at his heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Ps. 78:40, 41)</strong></a> How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert! <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel.</p><p></p><p>Or “pained.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong></a> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***w11 7/1 p. 10 Does Jehovah Have Feelings?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl"><strong>Draw Close to God</strong></p>
<h1><strong>Does Jehovah Have Feelings?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p3">IF THE answer is yes, then another question arises: Does our conduct affect God’s feelings? That is, can we by our actions cause God to feel happy or hurt? Some ancient philosophers said no. They argued that no one can influence God and that God must therefore be incapable of feeling. But the Bible gives a different picture, namely, that Jehovah has tender feelings and deeply cares about what we do. Consider the words found at <span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Psalm 78:40, 41</a>.</p>
<p class="p4"><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Psalm 78</a> recounts God’s dealings with ancient Israel. After delivering the nation from slavery in Egypt, Jehovah offered to enter into a special relationship with them. He promised that if they would remain obedient to his laws, they would become his “special property” and be used in an extraordinary way to fulfill his purpose. The people agreed and entered into the Law covenant. Did they live up to their end of the agreement?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Exodus 19:3-8</a>.</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p12">There is nothing more precious that we could give to Jehovah than to live in a way that brings joy to his heart</p>
</div>
<p class="p5">The psalmist says: “How often they would rebel against him in the wilderness!” (<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Verse 40</a>) The next verse adds: “Again and again they would put God to the test.” (<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Verse 41</a>) Notice that the writer describes a pattern of rebellion. This ugly spirit surfaced early<wbr />—in the wilderness shortly after their deliverance from Egypt. The people began to murmur against God, questioning whether he was able and willing to care for them. (<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Numbers 14:1-4</a>) A reference work for Bible translators says that the words “they would rebel against him” might be “rendered idiomatically as ‘they made their hearts hard against God’ or ‘they said “No” to God.’” Yet, in his mercy, Jehovah would forgive his people when they demonstrated repentance. But then they would return to their old ways and rebel again, and the pattern continued.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Psalm 78:10-19,</a><span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68"> 38</a>.</p>
<p class="p6">How did Jehovah feel each time his fickle people rebelled? “They would make him feel hurt,” says <span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">verse 40</a>. Another translation says that they would “give him cause for grief.” One Bible reference work explains: “The meaning here is that the conduct of the Hebrews was such as was fitted to cause pain,<wbr />—as the conduct of a disobedient and rebellious child is.” Just as an unruly child can cause his parents much pain of heart, the rebellious Israelites “pained even the Holy One of Israel.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">Verse 41</a>.</p>
<p class="p7">What can we learn from this psalm? It is reassuring to see that Jehovah has a strong attachment to his worshippers and is not quick to give up on them. At the same time, it is sobering to consider that Jehovah has feelings and that our conduct can affect his feelings. How does knowing that affect you? Does it move you to want to do what is right?</p>
<p class="p8">Rather than pursue a sinful course and bring pain to Jehovah’s heart, we can choose to follow an upright course and make his heart glad. And that is exactly what he asks of his worshippers: “Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice.” (<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Proverbs 27:11</a>) There is nothing more precious that we could give to Jehovah than to live in a way that brings joy to his heart.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><div class="boxTtl"><div><strong>Suggested Bible reading for July:</strong></div></div>
<div class="boxContent"><p class="p10"> <span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72"><strong>Psalms 60-86</strong></a></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:40, 41)</strong> How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert! <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel.</p><p></p><p>Or “pained.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:0-72)</strong> Masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>78 </strong>Listen, my people, to my law;* Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The things we have heard and know, Which our fathers have related to us,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We will not hide from their sons; We will relate to the generation to come The praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength, The wonderful things he has done.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established a reminder in Jacob And set a law in Israel; He commanded our forefathers To make these things known to their children,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that the next generation, The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s works But would observe his commandments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then they would not be like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation, A generation whose heart was unsteady* And whose spirit was not faithful to God.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow, But they retreated in the day of battle. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They challenged* God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Look! He struck a rock So that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread, Or can he provide meat for his people?” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>When Jehovah heard them, he became furious; A fire blazed against Jacob, And his anger flared up against Israel <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Because they did not put faith in God; They did not trust in his ability to save them. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So he commanded the cloudy skies above, And he opened the doors of heaven. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He kept raining down manna for them to eat; He gave them the grain of heaven. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Men ate the bread of mighty ones;* He provided enough to satisfy them. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He stirred up the east wind in the heavens And made a south wind blow by his power. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And he rained down meat on them like dust, Birds like the sand of the seashore. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He made them fall in the midst of his camp, All around his tents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>And they ate and gorged themselves; He gave them what they desired. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But before they fully satisfied their craving, While their food was yet in their mouth, <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>God’s wrath flared up against them. He put to death their strongest men; He brought down the young men of Israel. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Despite this they sinned even more And did not put faith in his wonderful works. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath, And their years by sudden terrors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>But as often as he killed them, they would search for him; They would return and look for God, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Remembering that God was their Rock And that the Most High God was their Redeemer.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But they tried to deceive him with their mouth And lied to him with their tongue. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Their heart was not steadfast toward him; And they were not faithful to his covenant. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>But he was merciful; He would forgive* their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his anger Instead of stirring up all his wrath. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>For he remembered that they were flesh, A wind that blows past and does not return.* <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert! <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>They did not remember his power,* The day that he rescued* them from the adversary, <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>How he displayed his signs in Egypt And his miracles in the region of Zoʹan, <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>And how he turned the Nile canals into blood So that they could not drink from their streams. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>He sent swarms of gadflies to devour them And frogs to bring them to ruin. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He gave their crops to the voracious locusts, The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>He destroyed their vines with hail And their sycamore trees with hailstones. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>He gave their beasts of burden over to the hail And their livestock to the lightning bolts.* <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>He inflicted his burning anger on them, Fury and indignation and distress, Companies of angels bringing calamity. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>He cleared a pathway for his anger. He did not spare them* from death; And he gave them* over to pestilence. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt, The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>Then he brought his people out like a flock And guided them like a drove in the wilderness. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>He led them in security, And they felt no fear; The sea covered their enemies. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>And he brought them to his holy territory, This mountainous region that his right hand acquired. <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>He drove out the nations from before them; He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line; He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>But they kept challenging* God the Most High, and rebelling against him; They did not pay attention to his reminders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers. They were as unreliable as a loose bow. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>They kept offending him with their high places, And they incited him to fury* with their carved images. <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>God heard and became furious, So he utterly rejected Israel. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh, The tent where he had resided among men. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity; His splendor into the hand of the adversary. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>He handed his people over to the sword And became furious with his inheritance. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>Fire consumed his young men, And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.* <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>His priests fell by the sword, And their own widows did not weep. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep, Like a mighty man waking up from wine. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>And he drove his adversaries back; He put them to lasting disgrace. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>He rejected the tent of Joseph; He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>But he chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which he loves. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens,* Like the earth that he has established forever. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>He chose David his servant And took him from the sheep pens, <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>From tending the nursing ewes; He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people, And over Israel, his inheritance. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>He shepherded them with integrity of heart, And with skillful hands he led them.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “instruction.”</p><p>Lit., “unprepared.”</p><p>Or “wall.”</p><p>Lit., “tested.”</p><p>Or “food for their soul.”</p><p>Or “of angels.”</p><p>Or “Avenger.”</p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Or possibly, “That the spirit is going forth and does not come back.”</p><p>Or “pained.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the burning fever.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Lit., “their life.”</p><p>Or “testing.”</p><p>Or “to jealousy.”</p><p>Lit., “And his virgins were not praised.”</p><p>Lit., “He built his sanctuary like the heights.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Ex. 19:3-8)</strong> Then Moses went up to the true God, and Jehovah called to him from the mountain, saying: “This is what you are to say to the house of Jacob and to tell the Israelites, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>‘You have seen for yourselves what I did to the Egyptians, in order to carry you on wings of eagles and bring you to myself. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Now if you will strictly obey my voice and keep my covenant, you will certainly become my special property* out of all peoples, for the whole earth belongs to me. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You will become to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you are to say to the Israelites.” <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>So Moses went and summoned the elders of the people and declared to them all these words that Jehovah had commanded him. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>After that all the people answered unanimously: “All that Jehovah has spoken, we are willing to do.” Moses immediately took the people’s response to Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “treasured possession.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:40)</strong> How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:41)</strong> Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel.</p><p></p><p>Or “pained.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Num. 14:1-4)</strong> Then all the assembly raised their voice, and the people continued crying out and weeping all through that night. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>All the Israelites began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, and the whole assembly spoke against them, saying: “If only we had died in the land of Egypt, or if only we had died in this wilderness! <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Why is Jehovah bringing us to this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and children will become plunder. Is it not better for us to return to Egypt?” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They were even saying to one another: “Let us appoint a leader and return to Egypt!”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:10-19)</strong> They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They challenged* God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?”</p><p></p><p>Or “wall.”</p><p>Lit., “tested.”</p><p>Or “food for their soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:38)</strong> But he was merciful; He would forgive* their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his anger Instead of stirring up all his wrath.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:40)</strong> How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 78:41)</strong> Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel.</p><p></p><p>Or “pained.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Pss. 60:0-86:17)</strong></a> To the director; set to “The Lily of Reminder.” Mikʹtam.* Of David. For teaching. When he fought with Aʹram-na·ha·raʹim and Aʹram-Zoʹbah, and Joʹab returned and struck down 12,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt. <strong>60 </strong>O God, you rejected us; you broke through our defenses. You were angry with us; but now accept us back!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You caused the earth to quake; you split it open. Repair its breaches, for it is falling.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You caused your people to suffer hardship. You made us drink wine that makes us stagger.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Give* a signal to those fearing you To flee and dodge the bow. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer us.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>God has spoken in his holiness:* “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley* of Sucʹcoth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet* for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Who will bring me to the besieged* city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries. </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Of David. <strong>61 </strong>Hear, O God, my cry for help. Do pay attention to my prayer.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>From the ends of the earth I will cry out to you When my heart is in despair.* Lead me onto a rock that is higher than I am.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For you are my refuge, A strong tower that protects me from the enemy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will be a guest in your tent forever; I will take refuge in the shelter of your wings. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O God, have heard my vows. You have given me the inheritance belonging to those who fear your name.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You will add days to the life* of the king, And his years will be from generation to generation.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He will sit enthroned* forever before God; Grant him* loyal love and faithfulness, so that these may safeguard him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then I will sing praises* to your name forever As I pay my vows day after day. </p><p>To the director; of Je·duʹthun.* A melody of David. <strong>62 </strong>Indeed, I wait* silently for God. My salvation comes from him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;* I will never be greatly shaken.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>How long will you assault a man in order to murder him? All of you are as dangerous as a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they consult together to topple him from his high position;* They take pleasure in lying. With their mouth they bless, but inside they are cursing. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Indeed, I wait silently* for God Because my hope comes from him.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge; I will never be shaken.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Upon God depends my salvation and my glory. My strong rock, my refuge, is God.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Trust in him at all times, O people. Pour out your hearts before him. God is a refuge for us. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The sons of men are a mere breath, The sons of mankind are a delusion. When laid together on the scales, they are lighter than a mere breath. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Do not trust in extortion Or put false hopes in robbery. If your wealth increases, do not set your heart on it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Once God has spoken, twice I have heard this: That strength belongs to God. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Also loyal love is yours, O Jehovah, For you repay each one according to his deeds. </p><p>A melody of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. <strong>63 </strong>O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you. I do thirst* for you. I am* faint with longing for you In a dry and parched land, where there is no water.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So I have looked upon you in the holy place; I have seen your strength and your glory.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Because your loyal love is better than life, My own lips will glorify you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Thus I will praise you all my life; In your name I will lift up my hands.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I am* satisfied with the best and choicest portion,* So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I cling* to you; Your right hand keeps fast hold on me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But those who seek to destroy my life* Will descend into the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They will be handed over to the power of the sword; They will become food for jackals.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the king will rejoice in God. Every person swearing by Him will exult,* For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced. </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. <strong>64 </strong>Hear my voice, O God, as I plead. Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men, From the crowd of wrongdoers.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They sharpen their tongue just like a sword; They aim their cruel words like arrows,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places; They shoot at him suddenly, without fear.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They hold fast to their evil intent;* They discuss how to hide their traps. They say: “Who will see them?”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They search out new ways of wrongdoing; They secretly devise their shrewd strategy; The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But God will shoot at them; Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Their own tongue will cause their downfall; All those looking on will shake their head.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then all men will become afraid, And they will proclaim what God has done, And they will have insight into his deeds. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him; All the upright in heart will exult.* </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. A song. <strong>65 </strong>Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion; We will pay our vows to you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>My errors have overwhelmed me, But you cover over our transgressions.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Happy is the one whom you choose and bring near To reside in your courtyards. We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house, Your holy temple.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You will answer us with awe-inspiring deeds of righteousness, O God of our salvation; You are the Confidence of all the ends of the earth And of those distant across the sea.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You* firmly established the mountains by your power; You* are clothed with mightiness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>You* calm the raging seas, The crash of their waves and the turmoil of the nations.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The inhabitants of remote places will be awestruck by your signs; You will cause those from the sunrise to the sunset to shout joyfully.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You care for the earth, Making it abundantly fruitful* and very rich. The stream from God is full of water; You provide grain for them, For that is how you prepared the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You drench its furrows and level off its plowed soil;* You soften it with showers of rain; you bless its growth. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You crown the year with your goodness; Your tracks overflow with abundance.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The pastures of the wilderness keep overflowing,* And the hills are clothed with joyfulness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The pastures are covered with flocks, And the valleys* are carpeted with grain. They shout in triumph, yes, they sing. </p><p>To the director. A song. A melody. <strong>66 </strong>Shout in triumph to God, all the earth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing praises* to his glorious name. Make his praise glorious.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are! Because of your great power, Your enemies will cringe before you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>All the earth will bow down to you; They will sing praises to you; They will sing praises to your name.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Come and see the works of God. His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He changed the sea into dry land; They crossed the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He rules forever by his might. His eyes keep watch on the nations. Those who are stubborn should not exalt themselves. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Praise our God, you peoples, And let the sound of his praise be heard.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He preserves us alive;* He does not allow our feet to stumble.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you have examined us, O God; As silver is refined, so you have refined us. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You brought us into a hunting net; You put a crushing burden upon us.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You allowed mortal man to ride over us;* We came through fire and through water; Then you brought us to a place of relief. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will come into your house with whole burnt offerings; I will pay my vows to you <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>That my lips promised And my mouth spoke when I was in distress. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will offer burnt offerings of fattened animals to you With the smoke of sacrificial rams. I will offer bulls along with male goats. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Come and listen, all you who fear God, And I will tell you what he has done for me.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I called to him with my mouth And glorified him with my tongue. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I had harbored anything hurtful in my heart, Jehovah would not have heard me. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But God did hear; He paid attention to my prayer. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Praise to God, who did not reject my prayer Or withhold his loyal love from me. </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody. A song. <strong>67 </strong>God will show us favor and bless us; He will make his face shine upon us (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So that your way may be known throughout the earth, Your acts of salvation among all the nations.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let nations rejoice and shout joyfully, For you will judge the peoples fairly. You will guide the nations of the earth. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The earth will give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God will bless us, And all the ends of the earth will fear* him. </p><p>To the director. Of David. A melody. A song. <strong>68 </strong>Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered, And let those who hate him flee from before him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As smoke is driven away, may you drive them away; As wax melts before the fire, So let the wicked perish before God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>But let the righteous rejoice; May they be overjoyed before God; May they exult with rejoicing.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Sing to God; sing praises* to his name. Sing to the One riding through the desert plains.* Jah* is his name! Rejoice before him!  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A father of the fatherless and a protector* of widows Is God in his holy dwelling.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in; He leads prisoners out into prosperity. But the stubborn* must live in a parched land.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O God, when you led* your people, When you marched through the desert, (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The earth quaked; Heaven poured down rain* because of God; This Siʹnai quaked because of God, the God of Israel.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You made it rain in abundance, O God; You reinvigorated your exhausted people.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They dwelled in your tent community; In your goodness, you provided for the poor, O God. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah gives the command; The women proclaiming the good news are a large army. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The kings of armies flee, they flee! She who remains at home shares in the spoil. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Although you men were lying among the campfires,* There will be the wings of a dove covered with silver, With pinions of fine* gold. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When the Almighty One scattered its kings, Snow fell in Zalʹmon.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of God;* The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of peaks. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Why do you look with envy, you mountains of peaks, Toward the mountain that God has chosen* as his dwelling? Indeed, Jehovah will reside there forever. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The war chariots of God are tens of thousands, thousands upon thousands. Jehovah has come from Siʹnai into the holy place. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>You ascended on high; You carried away captives; You took gifts in the form of men, Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load, The true God of our salvation. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The true God is for us a God who saves; And Jehovah the Sovereign Lord provides escape from death. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Yes, God will smash the heads of his enemies, The hairy crown of the head of anyone who continues* in his guilt. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jehovah has said: “I will bring them back from Baʹshan; I will bring them back from the depths of the sea, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So that your foot may be awash in blood And the tongue of your dogs may have its portion from the enemies.” <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They see your processions, O God, The processions of my God, my King, into the holy place. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The singers walk in front, the musicians playing stringed instruments after them; In between are the young women playing tambourines. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In congregated throngs,* praise God; Praise Jehovah, you who are from the Source of Israel. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>There Benjamin, the youngest, is subduing them, Also the princes of Judah with their noisy crowd, The princes of Zebʹu·lun, the princes of Naphʹta·li. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Your God has decreed that you will be strong. Show your strength, O God, you who have acted in our behalf. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Because of your temple at Jerusalem, Kings will bring gifts to you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds, The assembly of bulls and their calves, Until the peoples bow down bringing* pieces of silver. But he scatters the peoples who delight in war. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Bronze articles will be brought* out of Egypt; Cush will hasten to offer gifts to God. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God, Sing praises* to Jehovah, (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>To the one who rides the ancient heaven of heavens. Look! He thunders with his voice, his mighty voice. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Acknowledge God’s strength. His majesty is over Israel, And his strength is in the skies.* <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>God is awe-inspiring from his* grand sanctuary. He is the God of Israel, Who gives strength and power to the people. Praise to God. </p><p>To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of David. <strong>69 </strong>Save me, O God, for the waters threaten my life.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I have sunk down into the deep mud, where there is no solid ground. I have come into deep waters, And the rushing stream has swept me away.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I am exhausted from calling out; My throat has become hoarse. My eyes have grown weary while waiting for my God.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Those hating me without cause Are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me, My treacherous enemies,* have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>O God, you are aware of my foolishness, And my guilt is not hidden from you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May those hoping in you not be put to shame because of me, O Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies. May those seeking you not be humiliated because of me, O God of Israel.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I suffer reproach on your account; Humiliation covers my face.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I have become a stranger to my brothers, A foreigner to the sons of my mother.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Zeal for your house has consumed me, And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>When I humbled myself* with fasting,* I was reproached for it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became an object of scorn* to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I am the talk of those sitting in the city gate, And the drunkards make me the subject of their songs. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But may my prayer come to you, O Jehovah, at an acceptable time. In your abundant loyal love, O God, Answer me with your sure acts of salvation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Rescue me from the mire; Do not let me sink down. Rescue me from those who hate me And from the deep waters. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Do not let the rushing floodwaters sweep me away, Or let the deep swallow me, Or let the well* close its mouth over me. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Answer me, O Jehovah, for your loyal love is good. According to your abundant mercy turn toward me, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And do not hide your face from your servant. Answer me quickly, for I am in distress. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come near to me and rescue me;* Redeem me on account of my enemies. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>You know my reproach and my disgrace and my humiliation. You see all my foes. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Reproach has broken my heart, and the wound is incurable.* I was hoping for sympathy, but there was none, And for comforters, but I found none. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But for food they gave me poison,* And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Let their table become a trap for them, And their prosperity, a snare. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, And make their hips tremble constantly. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pour out upon them your indignation,* And may your burning anger overtake them. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Let their encampment* become desolate; Let there be no inhabitant in their tents. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For they pursue the one whom you struck, And they keep recounting the pains of those you wounded. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Add more guilt to their guilt, And may they have no share in your righteousness. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Let them be erased from the book of the living,* And may they not be enrolled among the righteous. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>But I am afflicted and in pain. May your saving power, O God, protect me. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>I will sing praises to the name of God, And I will magnify him with thanksgiving. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>This will please Jehovah more than a bull, More than a young bull with horns and hooves. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The meek will see it and rejoice. You who are seeking God, may your hearts revive. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is listening to the poor, And he will not despise his captive people. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Let heaven and earth praise him, The seas and everything that moves in them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For God will save Zion And will rebuild the cities of Judah, And they will dwell there and possess it.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>The descendants of his servants will inherit it, And those who love his name will reside in it. </p><p>To the director. Of David, to serve as a reminder.* <strong>70 </strong>O God, save me; O Jehovah, hurry to help me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May those seeking to take my life* Be put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamity Retreat in humiliation.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May those who are saying: “Aha! Aha!” Be driven back in shame.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But let those who are seeking you Exult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May God be magnified!”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But I am helpless and poor; O God, act quickly in my behalf. You are my helper and my rescuer; O Jehovah, do not delay. </p><p><strong>71 </strong>In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In your righteousness save me and rescue me. Incline your ear* to me and save me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Become for me a rock fortress Where I can always enter. Give the command to save me, For you are my crag and my stronghold.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked, From the grasp of the unjust oppressor.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I have trusted in you* since my youth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have depended on you from birth; It was you who took me from my mother’s womb. I praise you constantly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I have become like a miracle to many, But you are my strong refuge.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>My mouth is filled with your praise; All day long I tell about your splendor.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not cast me off in my old age; Do not abandon me when my strength fails. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>My enemies speak against me, And those seeking to take my life* conspire together, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Saying: “God has abandoned him. Chase after him and seize him, for there is no one to save him.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>O God, do not remain far away from me. O my God, hurry to help me. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>May those who are resisting me* Be put to shame and perish. May those seeking my calamity Be covered with disgrace and humiliation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will continue to wait; I will add to your praise. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My mouth will recount your righteousness, All day long your acts of salvation, Though they are too many for me to grasp.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I will come and tell about your mighty acts, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I will mention your righteousness, yours alone. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heights; You have done great things; O God, who is like you? <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Though you have made me experience much distress and calamity, Revive me again; Bring me up from the depths* of the earth. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May you increase my greatness And surround and comfort me. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Then I will praise you on a stringed instrument Because of your faithfulness, O my God. I will sing your praises* with the harp, O Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>My lips will shout joyfully as I sing praises to you, For you have saved my life.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My tongue will speak about* your righteousness all day long, For those seeking my destruction will be ashamed and disgraced. </p><p>Regarding Solomon. <strong>72 </strong>O God, give your judgments to the king, And endow the son of the king with your righteousness.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness, And of your lowly ones with justice.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May the mountains bring peace to the people, And may the hills bring righteousness.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let him defend* the lowly among the people, Let him save the sons of the poor, And let him crush the defrauder.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will fear you as long as there is a sun And as long as the moon remains, For generation after generation.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass, Like showers of rain that water the earth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In his days the righteous will flourish,* And peace will abound until the moon is no more.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The desert dwellers will bow down before him, And his enemies will lick the dust. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute. The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>All the kings will bow down before him, And all the nations will serve him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba. May prayers be said for him continually, And may he be blessed all day long. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May his name endure forever, And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him; May all nations pronounce him happy. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God, Who alone does wonderful things. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse. </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>73 </strong>God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As for me, my feet had almost strayed; My steps had nearly slipped.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For I became envious of the arrogant* When I would see the peace of the wicked.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they have no pain in their death; Their bodies are healthy.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They are not troubled like other humans, Nor do they suffer like other men.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace; Violence clothes them as a garment.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Their prosperity* makes their eyes bulge; They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They scoff and say evil things. They arrogantly threaten oppression.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They speak as if they were as high as heaven, And their tongues swagger about in the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So his people turn aside to them, And they drink from their abundant water. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They say: “How does God know? Does the Most High really have knowledge?” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy. They keep increasing their wealth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure And washed my hands in innocence. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And I was troubled all day long; Every morning I was chastised. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But if I had said these things, I would have betrayed your people.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When I tried to understand it, It was troubling to me <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God, And I discerned their future. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Surely you place them on slippery ground. You make them fall to their ruin. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>How suddenly they are devastated! How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah, When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss* their image. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But my heart was sour, And deep inside* I felt sharp pain. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I was unreasoning and lacked understanding; I was like a senseless beast before you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>But now I am continually with you; You have taken hold of my right hand. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You guide me with your advice, And afterward you will lead me to glory. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whom do I have in the heavens? And besides you I desire nothing on earth. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>My body and my heart may fail, But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Truly, those keeping far from you will perish. You will put an end to* everyone who immorally* leaves you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge, To declare all your works. </p><p>A masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>74 </strong>Why, O God, have you rejected us forever? Why does your anger burn* against the flock of your pasture?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Remember the people* you acquired long ago, The tribe you redeemed as your inheritance. Remember Mount Zion, where you have resided.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins. The enemy has devastated everything in the holy place.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Your foes roared inside your meeting place.* They have set up their own banners as signs there.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They were like men wielding axes against a thick forest.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They broke up all its engravings with axes and iron bars.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They set your sanctuary on fire. They profaned the tabernacle bearing your name, casting it to the ground.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They and their offspring have said in their hearts: “All the meeting places of God* in the land must be burned.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>There are no signs for us to see; There is no longer any prophet, And no one among us knows how long this will last. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting? Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand? Draw it out of your bosom* and put an end to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But God is my King from long ago, The one performing acts of salvation on the earth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>You stirred up the sea with your strength; You smashed the heads of the sea monsters in the waters. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You crushed the heads of Le·viʹa·than;* You gave it as food to the people, to those inhabiting the deserts. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>You cut openings for the springs and the streams; You dried up ever-flowing rivers. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The day belongs to you, also the night. You made the light* and the sun. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>You set up all the boundaries of the earth; You made summer and winter. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Remember the enemy’s taunts, O Jehovah, How a foolish people treats your name with disrespect. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Do not surrender the life* of your turtledove to the wild beasts. Do not forget the life of your afflicted people forever. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Remember the covenant, For the dark places of the earth have become full of the haunts of violence. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May the crushed one not turn away disappointed; May the lowly and the poor praise your name. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Rise up, O God, and plead your legal case. Remember how the foolish taunt you all day long. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Do not forget what your foes are saying. The uproar of those who defy you is ascending constantly. </p><p>To the director. Set to the melody “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of Aʹsaph. A song. <strong>75 </strong>We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you; Your name is near, And people declare your wondrous works.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You say: “When I set a time, I judge with fairness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the earth and all its inhabitants were dissolved, It was I who kept its pillars firm.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,” And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Do not exalt your strength* up high Or speak with arrogance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For exaltation does not come From the east or the west or the south.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For there is a cup in Jehovah’s hand; The wine is foaming and is fully mixed. He will surely pour it out, And all the wicked of the earth will drink it, down to the dregs.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will proclaim it forever; I will sing praises* to the God of Jacob. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For he says: “I will cut off all the strength* of the wicked, But the strength* of the righteous will be exalted.” </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of Aʹsaph. A song. <strong>76 </strong>God is known in Judah; In Israel his name is great.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>His shelter is in Saʹlem, And his dwelling is in Zion.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>There he broke the flaming arrows of the bow, The shield and the sword and the weapons of war. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You shine brightly;* You are more majestic than the mountains of prey.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The courageous of heart have been plundered. They have fallen asleep; The warriors were all helpless.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>From your rebuke, O God of Jacob, Both the charioteer and the horse have fallen fast asleep.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>You alone are awe-inspiring. Who can withstand your intense anger?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>From heaven you pronounced judgment; The earth was afraid and was silent  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When God rose up to execute judgment, To save all the meek of the earth. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the rage of man will serve to your praise; With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make your vows to Jehovah your God and pay them, Let all who are around him bring their gift in fear. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He will humble the pride* of leaders; He inspires fear in the kings of the earth. </p><p>To the director; on Je·duʹthun.* Of Aʹsaph. A melody. <strong>77 </strong>With my voice I will cry out to God; To God I will cry out, and he will hear me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In the day of my distress I search for Jehovah. At night my hands are stretched out to him without ceasing.* I* cannot be comforted.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When I remember God, I groan; I am troubled and my strength fails.* (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You hold my eyelids open; I am agitated and cannot speak.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>My thoughts turn to the days of long ago, The years of the distant past.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>During the night I remember my song;* I ponder in my heart; I make* a diligent search.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Will Jehovah cast us off forever? Will he never again show his favor?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Has his loyal love ceased forever? Will his promise come to nothing for all generations?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Has God forgotten to show his favor, Or has his anger caused his mercy to cease? (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Must I keep saying: “This is what distresses me:* The Most High has changed his position* toward us”? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O God, your ways are holy. What god is as great as you, O God? <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You are the true God, who does marvelous things. You have revealed your strength to the peoples. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>With your power* you have rescued* your people, The sons of Jacob and of Joseph. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The waters saw you, O God; The waters saw you and were disturbed. And the deep waters became agitated. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The clouds poured down water. The cloudy skies thundered, And your arrows flew here and there. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The sound of your thunder was like chariot wheels; Flashes of lightning lit up the inhabited earth;* The earth trembled and quaked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Your way was through the sea, Your path through many waters; But your footprints could not be traced. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>You led your people just like a flock, In the care* of Moses and Aaron. </p><p>Masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>78 </strong>Listen, my people, to my law;* Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The things we have heard and know, Which our fathers have related to us,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We will not hide from their sons; We will relate to the generation to come The praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength, The wonderful things he has done.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established a reminder in Jacob And set a law in Israel; He commanded our forefathers To make these things known to their children,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that the next generation, The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s works But would observe his commandments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then they would not be like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation, A generation whose heart was unsteady* And whose spirit was not faithful to God.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow, But they retreated in the day of battle. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They challenged* God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Look! He struck a rock So that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread, Or can he provide meat for his people?” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>When Jehovah heard them, he became furious; A fire blazed against Jacob, And his anger flared up against Israel <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Because they did not put faith in God; They did not trust in his ability to save them. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So he commanded the cloudy skies above, And he opened the doors of heaven. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He kept raining down manna for them to eat; He gave them the grain of heaven. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Men ate the bread of mighty ones;* He provided enough to satisfy them. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He stirred up the east wind in the heavens And made a south wind blow by his power. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And he rained down meat on them like dust, Birds like the sand of the seashore. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He made them fall in the midst of his camp, All around his tents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>And they ate and gorged themselves; He gave them what they desired. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But before they fully satisfied their craving, While their food was yet in their mouth, <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>God’s wrath flared up against them. He put to death their strongest men; He brought down the young men of Israel. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Despite this they sinned even more And did not put faith in his wonderful works. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath, And their years by sudden terrors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>But as often as he killed them, they would search for him; They would return and look for God, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Remembering that God was their Rock And that the Most High God was their Redeemer.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But they tried to deceive him with their mouth And lied to him with their tongue. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Their heart was not steadfast toward him; And they were not faithful to his covenant. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>But he was merciful; He would forgive* their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his anger Instead of stirring up all his wrath. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>For he remembered that they were flesh, A wind that blows past and does not return.* <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert! <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>They did not remember his power,* The day that he rescued* them from the adversary, <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>How he displayed his signs in Egypt And his miracles in the region of Zoʹan, <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>And how he turned the Nile canals into blood So that they could not drink from their streams. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>He sent swarms of gadflies to devour them And frogs to bring them to ruin. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He gave their crops to the voracious locusts, The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>He destroyed their vines with hail And their sycamore trees with hailstones. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>He gave their beasts of burden over to the hail And their livestock to the lightning bolts.* <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>He inflicted his burning anger on them, Fury and indignation and distress, Companies of angels bringing calamity. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>He cleared a pathway for his anger. He did not spare them* from death; And he gave them* over to pestilence. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt, The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>Then he brought his people out like a flock And guided them like a drove in the wilderness. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>He led them in security, And they felt no fear; The sea covered their enemies. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>And he brought them to his holy territory, This mountainous region that his right hand acquired. <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>He drove out the nations from before them; He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line; He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>But they kept challenging* God the Most High, and rebelling against him; They did not pay attention to his reminders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers. They were as unreliable as a loose bow. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>They kept offending him with their high places, And they incited him to fury* with their carved images. <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>God heard and became furious, So he utterly rejected Israel. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh, The tent where he had resided among men. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity; His splendor into the hand of the adversary. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>He handed his people over to the sword And became furious with his inheritance. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>Fire consumed his young men, And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.* <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>His priests fell by the sword, And their own widows did not weep. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep, Like a mighty man waking up from wine. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>And he drove his adversaries back; He put them to lasting disgrace. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>He rejected the tent of Joseph; He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>But he chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which he loves. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens,* Like the earth that he has established forever. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>He chose David his servant And took him from the sheep pens, <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>From tending the nursing ewes; He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people, And over Israel, his inheritance. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>He shepherded them with integrity of heart, And with skillful hands he led them. </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>79 </strong>O God, the nations have invaded your inheritance; They have defiled your holy temple; They have turned Jerusalem into a heap of ruins.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the heavens And the flesh of your loyal ones to the wild beasts of the earth.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They have poured out their blood like water around Jerusalem, And no one is left to bury them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We have become an object of reproach to our neighbors; Those around us ridicule and jeer us.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>How long, O Jehovah, will you be furious? Forever? How long will your indignation burn just like fire?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know you And on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For they have devoured Jacob And have desolated his homeland.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not hold us accountable for the errors of our ancestors. Quickly show us your mercy, For we have been brought very low.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Help us, O God of our salvation, For the sake of your glorious name; Rescue us and forgive* our sins for the sake of your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Why should the nations say: “Where is their God?” Before our eyes may it become known among the nations That the shed blood of your servants has been avenged. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>May you hear the sighing of the prisoner. Use your great power* to preserve* those sentenced to death.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Repay our neighbors sevenfold For the taunts they have leveled at you, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Then we, your people and the flock of your pasture, Will give thanks to you forever; And we will declare your praise from generation to generation. </p><p>To the director; set to “The Lilies.” A reminder. Of Aʹsaph. A melody. <strong>80 </strong>O Shepherd of Israel, listen, You who are guiding Joseph just like a flock. You who sit enthroned above* the cherubs, Shine forth.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Before Eʹphra·im and Benjamin and Ma·nasʹseh, Do stir up your mightiness; Come and save us.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>O God, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Jehovah God of armies, how long will you be hostile toward* the prayer of your people?  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You feed them tears as their bread, And you make them drink tears beyond measure.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You let our neighbors quarrel over us; Our enemies keep mocking us as they please.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You made a vine depart from Egypt. You drove out the nations and planted it.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You cleared a space for it, And it took root and filled the land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The mountains were covered by its shadow, And the cedars of God by its branches. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Its branches reached as far as the sea, And its shoots to the River.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Why have you broken down the stone walls of the vineyard, So that all those passing by pluck its fruit? <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The boars of the forest ravage it, And the wild animals of the field feed on it. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God of armies, please return. Look down from heaven and see! Take care of this vine, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The stock* that your right hand has planted, And look upon the son whom* you made strong for yourself. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>It is burned with fire, cut down. They perish at your rebuke.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May your hand give support to the man at your right hand, To the son of man you have made strong for yourself. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Then we will not turn away from you. Preserve us alive, so that we may call on your name. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, restore us; Let your face shine upon us, so that we may be saved. </p><p>To the director; upon the Gitʹtith.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>81 </strong>Shout joyfully to God our strength. Shout in triumph to the God of Jacob.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Begin the music and take a tambourine, The melodious harp together with the stringed instrument.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Blow the horn on the new moon, On the full moon, for the day of our festival.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For it is a decree for Israel, A ruling of the God of Jacob.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established it as a reminder for Joseph When He went out against the land of Egypt. I heard a voice* that I did not recognize:  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“I lifted the burden from his shoulder; His hands were freed from the basket.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In your distress you called, and I rescued you; I answered you from the thundercloud.* I tested you at the waters of Merʹi·bah.* (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Hear, my people, and I will testify against you. O Israel, if you would only listen to me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Among you, there will be no strange god, And you will not bow down to a foreign god. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>I, Jehovah, am your God, The one who brought you out of the land of Egypt. Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But my people did not listen to my voice; Israel would not submit to me. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So I let them follow their stubborn hearts; They did what they thought was right.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>If only my people would listen to me, If only Israel would walk in my ways! <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Their enemies I would quickly subdue; I would turn my hand against their adversaries. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Those who hate Jehovah will cringe in his presence, And their outcome* will be forever. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>But he will feed you* with the finest* wheat And satisfy you with honey from the rock.” </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>82 </strong>God takes his place in the divine assembly;* In the middle of the gods* he judges:  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“How long will you continue to judge with injustice And show partiality to the wicked? (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Defend* the lowly and the fatherless. Render justice to the helpless and destitute.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Rescue the lowly and the poor; Save them out of the hand of the wicked.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They do not know, nor do they understand; They are walking about in darkness; All the foundations of the earth are being shaken.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“I have said, ‘You are gods,* All of you are sons of the Most High.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But you will die just as men do; And like any other prince you will fall!’”  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Rise up, O God, and judge the earth, For all the nations belong to you. </p><p>A song. A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>83 </strong>O God, do not be silent; Do not keep quiet* or still, O Divine One.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For look! your enemies are in an uproar; Those who hate you act arrogantly.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>With cunning they secretly plot against your people; They conspire against your treasured ones.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>They say: “Come, let us annihilate them as a nation, So that the name of Israel may be remembered no more.”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They devise a unified strategy;* They have made an alliance* against you—  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The tents of Eʹdom and the Ishʹma·el·ites, Moʹab and the Hagʹrites,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Geʹbal and Amʹmon and Amʹa·lek, Phi·lisʹti·a together with the inhabitants of Tyre.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>As·syrʹi·a too has joined them; They give support to* the sons of Lot. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do to them as you did to Midʹi·an, As you did to Sisʹe·ra and Jaʹbin at the stream* of Kiʹshon. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They were annihilated at En-dor; They became manure for the ground. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make their nobles like Oʹreb and Zeʹeb And their princes* like Zeʹbah and Zal·munʹna, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For they said: “Let us take possession of the land where God dwells.” <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O my God, make them like a whirling thistle,* Like stubble blown about by the wind. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Like a fire that burns up the forest, Like a flame that scorches the mountains, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>So may you pursue them with your tempest And terrify them with your windstorm. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Cover* their faces with dishonor, So that they may search for your name, O Jehovah. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May they be put to shame and be terrified forever; May they be disgraced and perish; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth. </p><p>For the director; upon the Gitʹtith.* Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. <strong>84 </strong>How lovely* your grand tabernacle is, O Jehovah of armies!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>My whole being* yearns, Yes, I am faint with longing, For the courtyards of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh shout joyfully to the living God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Even the bird finds a home there And the swallow a nest for herself, Where she cares for her young Near your grand altar, O Jehovah of armies, My King and my God!  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Happy are those dwelling in your house! They continue to praise you. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Happy are the men who find their strength in you, Whose hearts are set on the highways.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>When they pass through the Baʹca Valley,* They make it into a place of springs; And the early rain clothes it* with blessings.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They will walk on from strength to strength; Each one appears before God in Zion.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>O Jehovah God of armies, hear my prayer; Listen, O God of Jacob. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Look, our shield and our God,* Look upon the face of your anointed one. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For a day in your courtyards is better than a thousand anywhere else! I choose to stand at the threshold of the house of my God Rather than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield; He gives favor and glory. Jehovah will not hold back anything good From those walking in integrity. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>O Jehovah of armies, Happy is the man who trusts in you. </p><p>For the director. Of the sons of Korʹah. A melody. <strong>85 </strong>You have shown favor, O Jehovah, to your land; You brought back those of Jacob who were taken captive.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You have pardoned the error of your people; You forgave* all their sin. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You held back all your fury; You turned away from your hot anger.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Restore us,* O God of our salvation, And set aside your displeasure with us.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Will you be furious with us forever? Will you prolong your anger to generation after generation?  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Will you not revive us again So that your people may rejoice in you?  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Show your loyal love to us, O Jehovah, And grant us your salvation.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I will listen to what the true God Jehovah says, For he will speak peace to his people, to his loyal ones, But let them not return to overconfidence.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him, So that his glory may reside in our land. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Loyal love and faithfulness will meet together; Righteousness and peace will kiss each other. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Faithfulness will sprout from the earth, And righteousness will look down from the heavens. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, Jehovah will give what is good,* And our land will yield its harvest. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Righteousness will walk before him And make a path for his footsteps. </p><p>A prayer of David. <strong>86 </strong>Incline your ear,* O Jehovah, and answer me, For I am afflicted and poor.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Guard my life,* for I am loyal. Save your servant who is trusting in you, For you are my God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Make your servant* rejoice, For to you, O Jehovah, I turn.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Listen, O Jehovah, to my prayer; And pay attention to my pleas for help.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I call on you in the day of my distress, For you will answer me.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>There is none like you among the gods, O Jehovah, There are no works like yours.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>All the nations that you made Will come and bow down before you, O Jehovah, And they will give glory to your name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you are great and do wondrous things; You are God, you alone. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Instruct me, O Jehovah, about your way. I will walk in your truth. Unify my heart* to fear your name. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I praise you, O Jehovah my God, with all my heart, And I will glorify your name forever, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For your loyal love toward me is great, And you have saved my life* from the depths of the Grave.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>O God, presumptuous men rise up against me; A band of ruthless men seek to take my life,* And they have no regard for you.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But you, O Jehovah, are a God merciful and compassionate,* Slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and faithfulness.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Turn to me and show me favor. Give your strength to your servant, And save the son of your slave girl. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Show me a sign* of your goodness, So that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame. For you, O Jehovah, are my helper and comforter.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “You have given.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in his holy place.”</p><p>Or “Low Plain.”</p><p>Lit., “stronghold.”</p><p>Or possibly, “fortified.”</p><p>Or “grows feeble.”</p><p>Lit., “days.”</p><p>Or “will dwell.”</p><p>Or “Assign.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul waits.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Or possibly, “All of you, as if he were a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.”</p><p>Or “his dignity.”</p><p>Or “wait silently, O my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul thirsts.”</p><p>Lit., “My flesh is.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “as with fat and fatness.”</p><p>Or “My soul clings.”</p><p>Or “destroy my soul; kill me.”</p><p>Or “foxes.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Or “They encourage one another to do evil.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Or “sanctuary.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “making it overflow.”</p><p>Or “its ridges.”</p><p>Lit., “drip with fatness.”</p><p>Lit., “dripping.”</p><p>Or “low plains.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “sets our soul in life.”</p><p>Or “stagger; totter.”</p><p>Lit., “on our hips.”</p><p>Lit., “our head.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “honor.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “on the clouds.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Or “rebellious.”</p><p>Lit., “went out before.”</p><p>Lit., “dripped.”</p><p>Lit., “inheritance.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the sheepfolds.”</p><p>Or “yellowish-green.”</p><p>Or “It was as if it snowed in Zalmon.”</p><p>Or “a majestic mountain.”</p><p>Or “desires.”</p><p>Or “walks about.”</p><p>Lit., “In assemblies.”</p><p>Or possibly, “stamping down on.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Ambassadors will come.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Lit., “clouds.”</p><p>Lit., “your.”</p><p>Or “have come to my soul.”</p><p>Or “enemies for no reason.”</p><p>Lit., “my soul.”</p><p>Or possibly, “When I wept and fasted.”</p><p>Lit., “a proverb.”</p><p>Or “pit.”</p><p>Or “Come near to my soul and reclaim it.”</p><p>Or “and I am to the point of despair.”</p><p>Or “a poisonous plant.”</p><p>Or “wrath.”</p><p>Or “walled camp.”</p><p>Or “book of life.”</p><p>That is, the land.</p><p>Or “to bring to remembrance.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “You are my confidence.”</p><p>Or “seeking my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “number.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or “watery deeps.”</p><p>Or “make music to you.”</p><p>Or “redeemed my soul.”</p><p>Or “meditate on.”</p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Lit., “sprout.”</p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p><p>Or “boasters.”</p><p>Or “Their paunch is fat.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p><p>Lit., “the generation of your sons.”</p><p>Lit., “despise.”</p><p>Lit., “in my kidneys.”</p><p>Lit., “silence.”</p><p>Or “unfaithfully.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “smoke.”</p><p>Lit., “your assembly.”</p><p>Or “your place of assembly.”</p><p>Or “All places where God is worshipped.”</p><p>Or “from the folds of your garment.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the luminary.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Or “You are enveloped with light.”</p><p>Lit., “spirit.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “growing numb.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Lit., “my spirit faints.”</p><p>Or “string music.”</p><p>Lit., “My spirit makes.”</p><p>Or “pierces me.”</p><p>Lit., “right hand.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Lit., “By the hand.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “instruction.”</p><p>Lit., “unprepared.”</p><p>Or “wall.”</p><p>Lit., “tested.”</p><p>Or “food for their soul.”</p><p>Or “of angels.”</p><p>Or “Avenger.”</p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Or possibly, “That the spirit is going forth and does not come back.”</p><p>Or “pained.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the burning fever.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Lit., “their life.”</p><p>Or “testing.”</p><p>Or “to jealousy.”</p><p>Lit., “And his virgins were not praised.”</p><p>Lit., “He built his sanctuary like the heights.”</p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or possibly, “set free.”</p><p>Lit., “the sons of death.”</p><p>Or possibly, “between.”</p><p>Or “Reveal your radiance.”</p><p>Lit., “fume against.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “main stem of the vine.”</p><p>Or “branch that.”</p><p>Lit., “the rebuke of your face.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “language.”</p><p>Lit., “in the hidden place of thunder.”</p><p>Meaning “Quarreling.”</p><p>Lit., “They walked in their counsels.”</p><p>Lit., “time.”</p><p>Lit., “him,” that is, God’s people.</p><p>Lit., “the fat of.”</p><p>Or “in the assembly of the Divine One.”</p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p><p>Or “Judge.”</p><p>Or “godlike ones.”</p><p>Or “keep speechless.”</p><p>Or “raise their heads.”</p><p>Lit., “concealed ones.”</p><p>Lit., “They consult with a heart together.”</p><p>Or “a covenant.”</p><p>Lit., “have become an arm to.”</p><p>Or “wadi.”</p><p>Or “leaders.”</p><p>Or “like tumbleweed.”</p><p>Lit., “Fill.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “deeply loved.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Or “the valley of baca bushes.”</p><p>Or possibly, “And the instructor enwraps himself.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Look at our shield, O God.”</p><p>Lit., “covered.”</p><p>Or “Gather us back.”</p><p>Or “prosperity.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “the soul of your servant.”</p><p>Or “I raise my soul.”</p><p>Or “Give me an undivided heart.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “seek my soul.”</p><p>Or “have not set you in front of themselves.”</p><p>Or “gracious.”</p><p>Or “and truth.”</p><p>Or “evidence.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 16 What Does the Bible Say?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl"><strong>What Does the Bible Say?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>Is religion man-made?</strong></h2>
<p class="p3"><strong>SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE </strong>that religion is a human invention; others think that God uses religion to help people draw close to him. What do you think?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p5">There is a “religion that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father.” (<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">James 1:27</a>, footnote) Pure, or true, religion comes from God.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  To please God, a religion must be based on Bible truth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">John 4:23, 24</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  Religions based on human ideas are futile.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Mark 7:7, 8</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>Is it necessary to belong to a religion?</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>WHAT WOULD YOU SAY?</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p11">  Yes</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p12">  No</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p13">  It depends</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p14"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p15">“Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together.” (<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) God wants his worshippers to gather as an organized group.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p17">  Those who worship God together should be united in belief.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">1 Corinthians 1:10, 11</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">  Members of the religion that God approves form a worldwide brotherhood.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">1 Peter 2:17</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="relatedContent"><p class="p19">For more information, see chapter 15 of this book, <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em><em>, </em>published by Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
<p class="p20">Also available at www.jw.org</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(Jas. 1:27)</strong></a> The form of worship* that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation, and to keep oneself without spot from the world.</p><p></p><p>Or “religion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(John 4:23, 24)</strong></a> Nevertheless, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshippers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(Mark 7:7, 8)</strong></a> It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’ <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You let go of the commandment of God and cling to the tradition of men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 1:10, 11)</strong></a> Now I urge you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For some from the house of Chloʹe have informed me regarding you, my brothers, that there are dissensions among you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:17)</strong></a> Honor men of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers,* be in fear of God, honor the king.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the brotherhood.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource13">^ <span id="pcitation13"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 16 What Does the Bible Say?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl"><strong>What Does the Bible Say?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>Is religion man-made?</strong></h2>
<p class="p3"><strong>SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE </strong>that religion is a human invention; others think that God uses religion to help people draw close to him. What do you think?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p5">There is a “religion that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father.” (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">James 1:27</a>, footnote) Pure, or true, religion comes from God.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  To please God, a religion must be based on Bible truth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">John 4:23, 24</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  Religions based on human ideas are futile.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Mark 7:7, 8</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>Is it necessary to belong to a religion?</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>WHAT WOULD YOU SAY?</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p11">  Yes</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p12">  No</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p13">  It depends</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p14"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p15">“Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together.” (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) God wants his worshippers to gather as an organized group.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p17">  Those who worship God together should be united in belief.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83">1 Corinthians 1:10, 11</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">  Members of the religion that God approves form a worldwide brotherhood.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">1 Peter 2:17</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="relatedContent"><p class="p19">For more information, see chapter 15 of this book, <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em><em>, </em>published by Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
<p class="p20">Also available at www.jw.org</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Jas. 1:27)</strong></a> The form of worship* that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation, and to keep oneself without spot from the world.</p><p></p><p>Or “religion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(John 4:23, 24)</strong></a> Nevertheless, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshippers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Mark 7:7, 8)</strong></a> It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’ <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You let go of the commandment of God and cling to the tradition of men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 1:10, 11)</strong></a> Now I urge you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For some from the house of Chloʹe have informed me regarding you, my brothers, that there are dissensions among you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:17)</strong></a> Honor men of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers,* be in fear of God, honor the king.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the brotherhood.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource14">^ <span id="pcitation14"></span><strong>***fg lesson 5***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p12">When will God bring an end to evil on earth? Jesus gave a “sign” to indicate when the end would be near. Present world conditions threaten man’s survival and show that we now live in “the conclusion of the system of things.”<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85"><em>Matthew 24:3,</em></a><span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86"> <em>7-14,</em></a><span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87"> <em>21, 22</em></a><em>.</em></p>
<p class="p13">During Jesus’ 1,000-year rule from heaven over the earth, he will bring all suffering to an end. (<span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88">Isaiah 9:6, 7;</a><span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89"> 11:9</a>) Besides serving as King, Jesus will act as High Priest and will cancel the sins of those who love God. Thus, by means of Jesus, God will eliminate sickness, aging, and death.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90"><em>Isaiah 25:8;</em></a><span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91"> <em>33:24</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:3)</strong> While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”*</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:7-14)</strong> “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Many false prophets will arise and mislead many; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But the one who has endured* to the end will be saved. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p><p>Or “who endures.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:21, 22)</strong> for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 9:6, 7)</strong> For a child has been born to us, A son has been given to us; And the rulership* will rest on his shoulder. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>To the increase of his rulership* And to peace, there will be no end, On the throne of David and on his kingdom In order to establish it firmly and to sustain it Through justice and righteousness, From now on and forever. The zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this.</p><p></p><p>Or “government; princely rule.”</p><p>Or “government; princely rule.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 11:9)</strong> They will not cause any harm Or any ruin in all my holy mountain, Because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah As the waters cover the sea.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 25:8)</strong> He will swallow up* death forever, And the Sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces. The reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth, For Jehovah himself has spoken it.</p><p></p><p>Or “do away with.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 33:24)</strong> And no resident* will say: “I am sick.” The people dwelling in the land will be pardoned for their error.</p><p></p><p>Or “inhabitant.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource15">^ <span id="pcitation15"></span><strong>***sn song 15 Creation Reveals Jehovah’s Glory***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 15</p>
<h1><strong>Creation Reveals Jehovah’s Glory</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92">Psalm 19</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Jehovah God, my soul is well aware.</p>
<p class="p5">A host of stars, your glory does declare.</p>
<p class="p6">From day to day and night to night they speak</p>
<p class="p7">And without words bring knowledge to the meek.</p>
<p class="p8">From day to day and night to night they speak</p>
<p class="p9">And without words bring knowledge to the meek.</p>
<p class="p10">2. For you have made the sun and moon and stars.</p>
<p class="p11">Great oceans stop where you have set their bars.</p>
<p class="p12">We lift our eyes and see your heavens grand.</p>
<p class="p13">We stand in awe that you remember man.</p>
<p class="p14">We lift our eyes and see your heavens grand.</p>
<p class="p15">We stand in awe that you remember man.</p>
<p class="p16">3. Your laws are pure, and your commands are true.</p>
<p class="p17">Day after day, reminders come from you.</p>
<p class="p18">They make us wise, are better than fine gold.</p>
<p class="p19">Oh, may we keep them, always to them hold.</p>
<p class="p20">They make us wise, are better than fine gold.</p>
<p class="p21">Oh, may we keep them, always to them hold.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p22">(See also <span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93">Ps. 12:6;</a><span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94"> 89:7;</a><span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95"> 144:3;</a><span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96"> Rom. 1:20</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <strong>(Ps. 19:0-14)</strong></a> To the director. A melody of David. <strong>19 </strong>The heavens are declaring the glory of God; The skies above* proclaim the work of his hands.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Day after day their speech bubbles forth, And night after night they reveal knowledge.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>There is no speech, and there are no words; Their voice is not heard.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But into all the earth their sound* has gone out, And to the ends of the inhabited earth* their message. In the heavens he has pitched a tent for the sun;  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>It is like a bridegroom emerging from the bridal chamber; It rejoices like a mighty man running his course.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>It emerges from one end of the heavens, And it circles to their other end; And nothing is concealed from its heat.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring strength.* The reminder of Jehovah is trustworthy, making the inexperienced one wise.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The orders from Jehovah are righteous, causing the heart to rejoice; The commandment of Jehovah is clean, making the eyes shine.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is pure, lasting forever. The judgments of Jehovah are true, altogether righteous. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They are more desirable than gold, Than much fine* gold, And sweeter than honey, the honey that drips from the combs. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>By them your servant has been warned; In keeping them, there is a large reward. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Who can discern mistakes? Pronounce me innocent from sins I am unaware of. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>And hold your servant back from presumptuous acts; Do not let them dominate me. Then I will be complete, And innocent of blatant sins.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart Be pleasing to you, O Jehovah, my Rock and my Redeemer.</p><p></p><p>Or “expanse.”</p><p>Or possibly, “measuring line.”</p><p>Or “productive land.”</p><p>Or “restoring (bringing back) the soul.”</p><p>Or “refined.”</p><p>Or “much transgression.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <strong>(Ps. 12:6)</strong></a> The sayings of Jehovah are pure; They are like silver refined in an earthen furnace,* purified seven times.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “a smelting furnace set on the ground.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <strong>(Ps. 89:7)</strong></a> God is held in awe in the council* of holy ones; He is grand and awe-inspiring to all who are around him.</p><p></p><p>Or “assembly.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <strong>(Ps. 144:3)</strong></a> O Jehovah, what is man that you should notice him, The son of mortal man that you should pay attention to him?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <strong>(Rom. 1:20)</strong></a> For his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource16">^ <span id="pcitation16"></span><strong>***ia pp. 172-176 “I Have Believed”***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"> <strong>1. </strong>Describe Martha’s grief and its cause.</p>
<p class="p3">MARTHA could see it in her mind’s eye<wbr />—her brother’s tomb, a cave sealed with a stone against the entrance. Her grief was a burden as cold and heavy as that rock. She could barely believe that her beloved Lazarus was gone. The four days since he had taken his last breath seemed like one long blur of mourning, visitors, and condolences.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>2, 3. </strong>(a) Seeing Jesus likely had what effect on Martha? (b) What did Martha’s important statement show about her?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>And now, standing before Martha was the man who had meant the most to Lazarus. Seeing Jesus likely brought her grief into sharp focus, for he was the one person in all the world who could have saved her brother. Still, Martha found some comfort in being with Jesus here outside the little hillside town of Bethany. In her few moments with him, she again felt warmed by the kindness in his eyes, the keen empathy that was always so encouraging. He asked her questions that helped her to focus on her faith and on her beliefs about the resurrection. The conversation led Martha to make one of the most important statements that would ever pass her lips: “I have believed that you are the Christ the Son of God, the One coming into the world.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97">John 11:27</a>.</p>
<p class="p5"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>As those words show, Martha was a woman of remarkable faith. What little the Bible tells us of her imparts profound lessons that can help us strengthen our own faith. To see how that is so, let us consider the first account about Martha in the Bible.</p>
<h2><strong>“Anxious and Disturbed”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> <strong>4. </strong>In what way was Martha’s family unusual, and what was the family’s relationship with Jesus?</p>
<p class="p7"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>It was months earlier. Lazarus was alive and well. His home in Bethany was about to receive the most important of visitors, Jesus Christ. Lazarus, Martha, and Mary were an unusual family<wbr />—three grown siblings who evidently shared a home. Some researchers suggest that Martha may have been the eldest of the three, since she seems to have acted as hostess and at times is mentioned first. (<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">John 11:5</a>) There is no way of knowing whether any of the three were ever married. At any rate, they became close friends of Jesus. During his ministry in Judea, where he met so much opposition and hostility, Jesus made their home his base. No doubt, he greatly appreciated that haven of peace and support.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>5, 6. </strong>(a) Why was Martha particularly busy during Jesus’ present visit? (b) How did Mary respond to the opportunity afforded by Jesus’ presence at their home?</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Martha had much to do with the comfort and hospitality of the home. A busy, industrious soul, she often seems to have been in a flurry of activity. The present occasion of Jesus’ visit was no exception. She soon planned a special meal with many dishes for her distinguished guest and, perhaps, some of his traveling companions. Back then, hospitality was very important. When a guest arrived, he was welcomed with a kiss, his sandals were removed, his feet were washed, and his head was greased with refreshing perfumed oil. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99"><strong><em>Luke 7:44-47</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>As to his accommodations and nourishment, every care was to be taken.</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Martha and Mary had their work cut out for them. Mary, who is sometimes thought of as the more sensitive and contemplative of the two, surely helped her sister out at first. But after Jesus arrived, things changed. He viewed the occasion as a time to teach<wbr />—and teach he did! Unlike the religious leaders of the day, Jesus respected women and readily taught them about God’s Kingdom, the theme of his ministry. Mary, thrilled at this opportunity, sat at his feet and took in every word.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>7, 8. </strong>Why did tension rise within Martha’s heart, and how did she finally express it?</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>We can just imagine the tension rising within Martha’s heart. With all the dishes she had to prepare and all the duties she had to carry out for her guests, she became more and more anxious and distracted. As she passed to and fro on her busy way and saw her sister sitting there doing nothing to help her, did she color slightly, sigh audibly, or frown? It would not be surprising if she did. She could not do all this work on her own!</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Finally, Martha could no longer suppress her frustration. She interrupted Jesus, blurting out: “Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things? Tell her, therefore, to join in helping me.” (<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Luke 10:40</a>) These were strong words. A number of translations render her question to this effect: “Lord, do you not care . . . ?” Then she asked Jesus to correct Mary, to order her back to work.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>9, 10. </strong>(a) How did Jesus reply to Martha? (b) How do we know that Jesus was not dismissing Martha’s hard work?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Jesus’ reply may have surprised Martha, as it has many Bible readers since. He gently said: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things. A few things, though, are needed, or just one. For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.” (<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Luke 10:41, 42</a>) What did Jesus mean? Was he calling Martha a materialist? Was he dismissing her hard work in preparing a fine meal?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>No. Jesus clearly saw that Martha’s motives were loving and pure. Further, he did not feel that even bounteous hospitality was necessarily wrong. He had willingly attended Matthew’s “big reception feast” for him sometime earlier. (<span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102">Luke 5:29</a>) Martha’s meal was not the key issue here; rather, it was her priorities. So focused was she on her elaborate meal that she lost sight of what mattered most. What was that?</p>
<div class="stdPullQuote"><p class="p59">Jesus appreciated Martha’s hospitality, and he knew that her motives were loving and pure</p>
</div>
<p class="qu"><strong>11, 12. </strong>How did Jesus gently correct Martha?</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jesus, the only-begotten Son of Jehovah God, was in Martha’s home to teach the truth. Nothing, including her lovely meal and preparations, could be more important. Jesus was no doubt saddened that Martha was missing out on a unique opportunity to deepen her faith, but he let her make her own choice.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> It was quite another thing, though, for Martha to ask Jesus to coerce Mary into missing out as well.</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>So he gently corrected Martha, repeating her name soothingly to calm her agitated nerves, and he assured her that there was no need to be “anxious and disturbed about many things.” A simple meal of one or two dishes would be sufficient, especially when a spiritual feast was available. By no means, then, would he take away from Mary “the good portion” she had chosen<wbr />—that of learning from Jesus!</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>13. </strong>What lessons can we learn from the way that Jesus corrected Martha?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>This little domestic scene is rich in lessons for Christ’s followers today. We must never allow anything to crowd out the filling of our “spiritual need.” (<span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103">Matt. 5:3</a>) While we want to imitate Martha’s generous, industrious spirit, we never want to become so “anxious and disturbed” about the less essential part of hospitality that we miss out on what matters most. We associate with fellow believers, not primarily for the sake of serving or receiving sumptuous food, but mainly for an interchange of encouragement and the imparting of spiritual gifts. <strong>(<em>Read </em></strong><span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104"><strong><em>Romans 1:11, 12</em></strong></a><strong><em>.</em>) </strong>Even the simplest meal may make such an upbuilding occasion possible.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(John 11:27)</strong> She said to him: “Yes, Lord, I have believed that you are the Christ, the Son of God, the one coming into the world.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(John 11:5)</strong> Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazʹa·rus.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Luke 7:44-47)</strong> With that he turned to the woman and said to Simon: “Do you see this woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet. But this woman wet my feet with her tears and wiped them off with her hair. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>You gave me no kiss, but this woman, from the hour that I came in, did not stop tenderly kissing my feet. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>You did not pour oil on my head, but this woman poured perfumed oil on my feet. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Because of this, I tell you, her sins, many* though they are, are forgiven, because she loved much. But the one who is forgiven little, loves little.”</p><p></p><p>Or “great.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Luke 10:40)</strong> Martha, on the other hand, was distracted with attending to many duties. So she came to him and said: “Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things? Tell her to come and help me.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 9</span></a> <strong>(Luke 10:41, 42)</strong> In answer the Lord said to her: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>A few things, though, are needed, or just one. For her part, Mary chose the good portion,* and it will not be taken away from her.”</p><p></p><p>Or “best portion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Luke 5:29)</strong> Then Leʹvi spread a big reception feast for him in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were dining* with them.</p><p></p><p>Or “reclining at the table.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 5:3)</strong> “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need,* since the Kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.</p><p></p><p>Or “those who are beggars for the spirit.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 13</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:11, 12)</strong> For I am longing to see you, that I may impart some spiritual gift to you for you to be made firm; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>or, rather, that we may have an interchange of encouragement by one another’s faith, both yours and mine.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> In first-century Jewish society, women were generally excluded from academic activities. Their training tended to focus on duties in the home. Martha may thus have seen it as highly unusual for a woman to sit at the feet of a scholar to learn.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016248.xhtml#pcitationsource17">^ <span id="pcitation17"></span><strong>***sn song 73 Love Intensely From the Heart***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 73</p>
<h1><strong>Love Intensely From the Heart</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105">1 Peter 1:22</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Love must come from deep in our hearts,</p>
<p class="p5">There is the place affection starts;</p>
<p class="p6">Real fellow feeling it imparts</p>
<p class="p7">For all our brothers dear.</p>
<p class="p8">We will find the way to express</p>
<p class="p9">Loving intentions we possess,</p>
<p class="p10">Practicing God’s large heartedness,</p>
<p class="p11">Proving our love sincere.</p>
<p class="p12">Let us love in word and deed,</p>
<p class="p13">Being generous to those in need,</p>
<p class="p14">Letting goodness take the lead</p>
<p class="p15">With each opportunity.</p>
<p class="p16">Honor and respect we display;</p>
<p class="p17">Kindly concern will be our way.</p>
<p class="p18">Our brothers’ faults we won’t betray.</p>
<p class="p19">Ever loyal we will be,</p>
<p class="p20">Guarding precious unity.</p>
<p class="p21">2. When our love is pure and intense,</p>
<p class="p22">We will be slow to take offense;</p>
<p class="p23">Reason we have for confidence</p>
<p class="p24">In all our brothers true.</p>
<p class="p25">Loyal friendships, we cultivate;</p>
<p class="p26">Each other we appreciate.</p>
<p class="p27">Pleasurably we congregate,</p>
<p class="p28">Gaining our strength anew.</p>
<p class="p29">Day by day we all transgress;</p>
<p class="p30">Thoughtless words can often cause distress.</p>
<p class="p31">So we must show tenderness</p>
<p class="p32">To those whom our God does love.</p>
<p class="p33">True companions we’ll ever be,</p>
<p class="p34">Strengthening bonds with constancy.</p>
<p class="p35">Let love be your identity.</p>
<p class="p36">Magnifying God above,</p>
<p class="p37">Imitate Jehovah’s love.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p38">(See also <span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106">1 Pet. 2:17;</a><span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107"> 3:8;</a><span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108"> 4:8;</a><span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109"> 1 John 3:11</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 1:22)</strong></a> Now that you have purified yourselves* by your obedience to the truth with unhypocritical brotherly affection as the result, love one another intensely from the heart.</p><p></p><p>Or “your souls.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:17)</strong></a> Honor men of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers,* be in fear of God, honor the king.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the brotherhood.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 3:8)</strong></a> Finally, all of you have unity of mind,* fellow feeling, brotherly affection, tender compassion, and humility.</p><p></p><p>Or “think in agreement.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 4:8)</strong></a> Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <strong>(1 John 3:11)</strong></a> For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another;</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
