<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 Jehovah’s People Are Zealous for True Worship</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016245.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 69:0-73:28)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>To the director; set to “The Lilies.” Of David. <strong>69 </strong>Save me, O God, for the waters threaten my life.*  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I have sunk down into the deep mud, where there is no solid ground. I have come into deep waters, And the rushing stream has swept me away.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I am exhausted from calling out; My throat has become hoarse. My eyes have grown weary while waiting for my God.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Those hating me without cause Are more numerous than the hairs of my head. Those who would do away with me, My treacherous enemies,* have become many. I was forced to hand over what I had not stolen.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>O God, you are aware of my foolishness, And my guilt is not hidden from you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>May those hoping in you not be put to shame because of me, O Sovereign Lord, Jehovah of armies. May those seeking you not be humiliated because of me, O God of Israel.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I suffer reproach on your account; Humiliation covers my face.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I have become a stranger to my brothers, A foreigner to the sons of my mother.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Zeal for your house has consumed me, And the reproaches of those reproaching you have fallen upon me. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>When I humbled myself* with fasting,* I was reproached for it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became an object of scorn* to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I am the talk of those sitting in the city gate, And the drunkards make me the subject of their songs. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But may my prayer come to you, O Jehovah, at an acceptable time. In your abundant loyal love, O God, Answer me with your sure acts of salvation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Rescue me from the mire; Do not let me sink down. Rescue me from those who hate me And from the deep waters. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Do not let the rushing floodwaters sweep me away, Or let the deep swallow me, Or let the well* close its mouth over me. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Answer me, O Jehovah, for your loyal love is good. According to your abundant mercy turn toward me, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>And do not hide your face from your servant. Answer me quickly, for I am in distress. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come near to me and rescue me;* Redeem me on account of my enemies. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>You know my reproach and my disgrace and my humiliation. You see all my foes. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Reproach has broken my heart, and the wound is incurable.* I was hoping for sympathy, but there was none, And for comforters, but I found none. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But for food they gave me poison,* And for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Let their table become a trap for them, And their prosperity, a snare. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Let their eyes become darkened so that they cannot see, And make their hips tremble constantly. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Pour out upon them your indignation,* And may your burning anger overtake them. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Let their encampment* become desolate; Let there be no inhabitant in their tents. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For they pursue the one whom you struck, And they keep recounting the pains of those you wounded. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Add more guilt to their guilt, And may they have no share in your righteousness. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Let them be erased from the book of the living,* And may they not be enrolled among the righteous. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>But I am afflicted and in pain. May your saving power, O God, protect me. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>I will sing praises to the name of God, And I will magnify him with thanksgiving. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>This will please Jehovah more than a bull, More than a young bull with horns and hooves. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The meek will see it and rejoice. You who are seeking God, may your hearts revive. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>For Jehovah is listening to the poor, And he will not despise his captive people. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Let heaven and earth praise him, The seas and everything that moves in them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For God will save Zion And will rebuild the cities of Judah, And they will dwell there and possess it.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>The descendants of his servants will inherit it, And those who love his name will reside in it. </p><p>To the director. Of David, to serve as a reminder.* <strong>70 </strong>O God, save me; O Jehovah, hurry to help me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May those seeking to take my life* Be put to shame and disgraced. May those who delight in my calamity Retreat in humiliation.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May those who are saying: “Aha! Aha!” Be driven back in shame.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But let those who are seeking you Exult and rejoice in you. May those who love your acts of salvation always say: “May God be magnified!”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>But I am helpless and poor; O God, act quickly in my behalf. You are my helper and my rescuer; O Jehovah, do not delay. </p><p><strong>71 </strong>In you, O Jehovah, I have taken refuge. May I never be put to shame.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In your righteousness save me and rescue me. Incline your ear* to me and save me.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Become for me a rock fortress Where I can always enter. Give the command to save me, For you are my crag and my stronghold.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked, From the grasp of the unjust oppressor.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you are my hope, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I have trusted in you* since my youth.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I have depended on you from birth; It was you who took me from my mother’s womb. I praise you constantly.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I have become like a miracle to many, But you are my strong refuge.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>My mouth is filled with your praise; All day long I tell about your splendor.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Do not cast me off in my old age; Do not abandon me when my strength fails. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>My enemies speak against me, And those seeking to take my life* conspire together, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Saying: “God has abandoned him. Chase after him and seize him, for there is no one to save him.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>O God, do not remain far away from me. O my God, hurry to help me. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>May those who are resisting me* Be put to shame and perish. May those seeking my calamity Be covered with disgrace and humiliation. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will continue to wait; I will add to your praise. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My mouth will recount your righteousness, All day long your acts of salvation, Though they are too many for me to grasp.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I will come and tell about your mighty acts, O Sovereign Lord Jehovah; I will mention your righteousness, yours alone. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>O God, you have taught me from my youth, And until now I keep declaring your wonderful works. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not abandon me. Let me tell the next generation about your power* And about your mightiness to all those who are to come. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heights; You have done great things; O God, who is like you? <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Though you have made me experience much distress and calamity, Revive me again; Bring me up from the depths* of the earth. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May you increase my greatness And surround and comfort me. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Then I will praise you on a stringed instrument Because of your faithfulness, O my God. I will sing your praises* with the harp, O Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>My lips will shout joyfully as I sing praises to you, For you have saved my life.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>My tongue will speak about* your righteousness all day long, For those seeking my destruction will be ashamed and disgraced. </p><p>Regarding Solomon. <strong>72 </strong>O God, give your judgments to the king, And endow the son of the king with your righteousness.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>May he plead the cause of your people with righteousness, And of your lowly ones with justice.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>May the mountains bring peace to the people, And may the hills bring righteousness.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let him defend* the lowly among the people, Let him save the sons of the poor, And let him crush the defrauder.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They will fear you as long as there is a sun And as long as the moon remains, For generation after generation.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He will be like the rain that falls on the mown grass, Like showers of rain that water the earth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>In his days the righteous will flourish,* And peace will abound until the moon is no more.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He will have subjects* from sea to sea And from the River* to the ends of the earth.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The desert dwellers will bow down before him, And his enemies will lick the dust. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The kings of Tarʹshish and of the islands will pay tribute. The kings of Sheʹba and of Seʹba will present gifts. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>All the kings will bow down before him, And all the nations will serve him. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>May he live and be given the gold of Sheʹba. May prayers be said for him continually, And may he be blessed all day long. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>May his name endure forever, And may it prosper as long as the sun. May people obtain a blessing for themselves by means of him; May all nations pronounce him happy. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May Jehovah God be praised, Israel’s God, Who alone does wonderful things. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May his glorious name be praised forever, And may his glory fill the whole earth. Amen and Amen. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>This completes the prayers of David, the son of Jesʹse. </p><p>A melody of Aʹsaph. <strong>73 </strong>God is truly good to Israel, to those pure in heart.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As for me, my feet had almost strayed; My steps had nearly slipped.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For I became envious of the arrogant* When I would see the peace of the wicked.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they have no pain in their death; Their bodies are healthy.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They are not troubled like other humans, Nor do they suffer like other men.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Therefore, haughtiness is their necklace; Violence clothes them as a garment.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Their prosperity* makes their eyes bulge; They have exceeded the imaginations of the heart.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They scoff and say evil things. They arrogantly threaten oppression.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They speak as if they were as high as heaven, And their tongues swagger about in the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So his people turn aside to them, And they drink from their abundant water. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They say: “How does God know? Does the Most High really have knowledge?” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Yes, these are the wicked, who always have it easy. They keep increasing their wealth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure And washed my hands in innocence. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And I was troubled all day long; Every morning I was chastised. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>But if I had said these things, I would have betrayed your people.* <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>When I tried to understand it, It was troubling to me <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Until I entered the grand sanctuary of God, And I discerned their future. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Surely you place them on slippery ground. You make them fall to their ruin. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>How suddenly they are devastated! How sudden is their finish as they come to a terrible end! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Like a dream when one wakes up, O Jehovah, When you rouse yourself, you will dismiss* their image. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>But my heart was sour, And deep inside* I felt sharp pain. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I was unreasoning and lacked understanding; I was like a senseless beast before you. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>But now I am continually with you; You have taken hold of my right hand. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>You guide me with your advice, And afterward you will lead me to glory. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Whom do I have in the heavens? And besides you I desire nothing on earth. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>My body and my heart may fail, But God is the rock of my heart and my portion forever. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Truly, those keeping far from you will perish. You will put an end to* everyone who immorally* leaves you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>But as for me, drawing near to God is good for me. I have made the Sovereign Lord Jehovah my refuge, To declare all your works.</p><p></p><p>Or “have come to my soul.”</p><p>Or “enemies for no reason.”</p><p>Lit., “my soul.”</p><p>Or possibly, “When I wept and fasted.”</p><p>Lit., “a proverb.”</p><p>Or “pit.”</p><p>Or “Come near to my soul and reclaim it.”</p><p>Or “and I am to the point of despair.”</p><p>Or “a poisonous plant.”</p><p>Or “wrath.”</p><p>Or “walled camp.”</p><p>Or “book of life.”</p><p>That is, the land.</p><p>Or “to bring to remembrance.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Bend down and listen.”</p><p>Or “You are my confidence.”</p><p>Or “seeking my soul.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “number.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Or “watery deeps.”</p><p>Or “make music to you.”</p><p>Or “redeemed my soul.”</p><p>Or “meditate on.”</p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Lit., “sprout.”</p><p>Or “will rule.”</p><p>That is, the Euphrates.</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p><p>Or “boasters.”</p><p>Or “Their paunch is fat.”</p><p>Lit., “fat.”</p><p>Lit., “the generation of your sons.”</p><p>Lit., “despise.”</p><p>Lit., “in my kidneys.”</p><p>Lit., “silence.”</p><p>Or “unfaithfully.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
