<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 Praise Jehovah, the Hearer of Prayer</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016242.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 60:0-68:35)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>To the director; set to “The Lily of Reminder.” Mikʹtam.* Of David. For teaching. When he fought with Aʹram-na·ha·raʹim and Aʹram-Zoʹbah, and Joʹab returned and struck down 12,000 Eʹdom·ites in the Valley of Salt. <strong>60 </strong>O God, you rejected us; you broke through our defenses. You were angry with us; but now accept us back!  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You caused the earth to quake; you split it open. Repair its breaches, for it is falling.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>You caused your people to suffer hardship. You made us drink wine that makes us stagger.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Give* a signal to those fearing you To flee and dodge the bow. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>So that your loved ones may be rescued, Save us with your right hand and answer us.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>God has spoken in his holiness:* “I will exult, I will give out Sheʹchem as an inheritance, And I will measure off the Valley* of Sucʹcoth.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Gilʹe·ad belongs to me, as does Ma·nasʹseh, And Eʹphra·im is the helmet* for my head; Judah is my commander’s staff.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Moʹab is my washbasin. Over Eʹdom I will throw my sandal. Over Phi·lisʹti·a I will shout in triumph.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Who will bring me to the besieged* city? Who will lead me as far as Eʹdom? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Is it not you, O God, who have rejected us, Our God, who no longer goes out with our armies? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Help us in our distress, For salvation by humans is worthless. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>By God we will gain power, And he will trample on our adversaries. </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. Of David. <strong>61 </strong>Hear, O God, my cry for help. Do pay attention to my prayer.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>From the ends of the earth I will cry out to you When my heart is in despair.* Lead me onto a rock that is higher than I am.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For you are my refuge, A strong tower that protects me from the enemy.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will be a guest in your tent forever; I will take refuge in the shelter of your wings. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>For you, O God, have heard my vows. You have given me the inheritance belonging to those who fear your name.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You will add days to the life* of the king, And his years will be from generation to generation.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He will sit enthroned* forever before God; Grant him* loyal love and faithfulness, so that these may safeguard him.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then I will sing praises* to your name forever As I pay my vows day after day. </p><p>To the director; of Je·duʹthun.* A melody of David. <strong>62 </strong>Indeed, I wait* silently for God. My salvation comes from him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge;* I will never be greatly shaken.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>How long will you assault a man in order to murder him? All of you are as dangerous as a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>For they consult together to topple him from his high position;* They take pleasure in lying. With their mouth they bless, but inside they are cursing. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Indeed, I wait silently* for God Because my hope comes from him.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Indeed, he is my rock and my salvation, my secure refuge; I will never be shaken.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Upon God depends my salvation and my glory. My strong rock, my refuge, is God.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Trust in him at all times, O people. Pour out your hearts before him. God is a refuge for us. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The sons of men are a mere breath, The sons of mankind are a delusion. When laid together on the scales, they are lighter than a mere breath. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Do not trust in extortion Or put false hopes in robbery. If your wealth increases, do not set your heart on it. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Once God has spoken, twice I have heard this: That strength belongs to God. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Also loyal love is yours, O Jehovah, For you repay each one according to his deeds. </p><p>A melody of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. <strong>63 </strong>O God, you are my God, I keep looking for you. I do thirst* for you. I am* faint with longing for you In a dry and parched land, where there is no water.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So I have looked upon you in the holy place; I have seen your strength and your glory.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Because your loyal love is better than life, My own lips will glorify you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Thus I will praise you all my life; In your name I will lift up my hands.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>I am* satisfied with the best and choicest portion,* So my mouth will praise you with joy on my lips.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>I cling* to you; Your right hand keeps fast hold on me.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But those who seek to destroy my life* Will descend into the depths of the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They will be handed over to the power of the sword; They will become food for jackals.* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>But the king will rejoice in God. Every person swearing by Him will exult,* For the mouth of those speaking lies will be silenced. </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. <strong>64 </strong>Hear my voice, O God, as I plead. Safeguard my life from the dreadfulness of the enemy.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Shield me from the secret plots of wicked men, From the crowd of wrongdoers.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>They sharpen their tongue just like a sword; They aim their cruel words like arrows,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To shoot at the innocent from their hiding places; They shoot at him suddenly, without fear.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They hold fast to their evil intent;* They discuss how to hide their traps. They say: “Who will see them?”  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They search out new ways of wrongdoing; They secretly devise their shrewd strategy; The thinking within each one’s heart is unfathomable.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>But God will shoot at them; Suddenly they will be wounded by an arrow.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Their own tongue will cause their downfall; All those looking on will shake their head.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then all men will become afraid, And they will proclaim what God has done, And they will have insight into his deeds. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The righteous one will rejoice in Jehovah and take refuge in him; All the upright in heart will exult.* </p><p>To the director. A melody of David. A song. <strong>65 </strong>Praise awaits you, O God, in Zion; We will pay our vows to you.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>O Hearer of prayer, to you people of all sorts* will come.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>My errors have overwhelmed me, But you cover over our transgressions.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Happy is the one whom you choose and bring near To reside in your courtyards. We will be satisfied with the goodness of your house, Your holy temple.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You will answer us with awe-inspiring deeds of righteousness, O God of our salvation; You are the Confidence of all the ends of the earth And of those distant across the sea.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You* firmly established the mountains by your power; You* are clothed with mightiness.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>You* calm the raging seas, The crash of their waves and the turmoil of the nations.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The inhabitants of remote places will be awestruck by your signs; You will cause those from the sunrise to the sunset to shout joyfully.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You care for the earth, Making it abundantly fruitful* and very rich. The stream from God is full of water; You provide grain for them, For that is how you prepared the earth. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You drench its furrows and level off its plowed soil;* You soften it with showers of rain; you bless its growth. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You crown the year with your goodness; Your tracks overflow with abundance.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The pastures of the wilderness keep overflowing,* And the hills are clothed with joyfulness. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The pastures are covered with flocks, And the valleys* are carpeted with grain. They shout in triumph, yes, they sing. </p><p>To the director. A song. A melody. <strong>66 </strong>Shout in triumph to God, all the earth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Sing praises* to his glorious name. Make his praise glorious.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Say to God: “How awe-inspiring your works are! Because of your great power, Your enemies will cringe before you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>All the earth will bow down to you; They will sing praises to you; They will sing praises to your name.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Come and see the works of God. His deeds toward the sons of men are awe-inspiring.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>He changed the sea into dry land; They crossed the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He rules forever by his might. His eyes keep watch on the nations. Those who are stubborn should not exalt themselves. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Praise our God, you peoples, And let the sound of his praise be heard.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>He preserves us alive;* He does not allow our feet to stumble.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For you have examined us, O God; As silver is refined, so you have refined us. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You brought us into a hunting net; You put a crushing burden upon us.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>You allowed mortal man to ride over us;* We came through fire and through water; Then you brought us to a place of relief. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I will come into your house with whole burnt offerings; I will pay my vows to you <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>That my lips promised And my mouth spoke when I was in distress. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>I will offer burnt offerings of fattened animals to you With the smoke of sacrificial rams. I will offer bulls along with male goats. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Come and listen, all you who fear God, And I will tell you what he has done for me.* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I called to him with my mouth And glorified him with my tongue. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If I had harbored anything hurtful in my heart, Jehovah would not have heard me. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>But God did hear; He paid attention to my prayer. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Praise to God, who did not reject my prayer Or withhold his loyal love from me. </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody. A song. <strong>67 </strong>God will show us favor and bless us; He will make his face shine upon us (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So that your way may be known throughout the earth, Your acts of salvation among all the nations.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Let nations rejoice and shout joyfully, For you will judge the peoples fairly. You will guide the nations of the earth. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Let peoples praise you, O God; Let all the peoples praise you.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The earth will give its produce; God, our God, will bless us.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>God will bless us, And all the ends of the earth will fear* him. </p><p>To the director. Of David. A melody. A song. <strong>68 </strong>Let God rise up, let his enemies be scattered, And let those who hate him flee from before him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>As smoke is driven away, may you drive them away; As wax melts before the fire, So let the wicked perish before God.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>But let the righteous rejoice; May they be overjoyed before God; May they exult with rejoicing.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Sing to God; sing praises* to his name. Sing to the One riding through the desert plains.* Jah* is his name! Rejoice before him!  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A father of the fatherless and a protector* of widows Is God in his holy dwelling.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>God gives those who are alone a home to dwell in; He leads prisoners out into prosperity. But the stubborn* must live in a parched land.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>O God, when you led* your people, When you marched through the desert, (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The earth quaked; Heaven poured down rain* because of God; This Siʹnai quaked because of God, the God of Israel.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You made it rain in abundance, O God; You reinvigorated your exhausted people.* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They dwelled in your tent community; In your goodness, you provided for the poor, O God. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Jehovah gives the command; The women proclaiming the good news are a large army. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The kings of armies flee, they flee! She who remains at home shares in the spoil. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Although you men were lying among the campfires,* There will be the wings of a dove covered with silver, With pinions of fine* gold. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When the Almighty One scattered its kings, Snow fell in Zalʹmon.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of God;* The mountain of Baʹshan is a mountain of peaks. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Why do you look with envy, you mountains of peaks, Toward the mountain that God has chosen* as his dwelling? Indeed, Jehovah will reside there forever. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The war chariots of God are tens of thousands, thousands upon thousands. Jehovah has come from Siʹnai into the holy place. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>You ascended on high; You carried away captives; You took gifts in the form of men, Yes, even stubborn ones, to reside among them, O Jah God. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>May Jehovah be praised, who daily carries our load, The true God of our salvation. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The true God is for us a God who saves; And Jehovah the Sovereign Lord provides escape from death. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Yes, God will smash the heads of his enemies, The hairy crown of the head of anyone who continues* in his guilt. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jehovah has said: “I will bring them back from Baʹshan; I will bring them back from the depths of the sea, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So that your foot may be awash in blood And the tongue of your dogs may have its portion from the enemies.” <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They see your processions, O God, The processions of my God, my King, into the holy place. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The singers walk in front, the musicians playing stringed instruments after them; In between are the young women playing tambourines. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In congregated throngs,* praise God; Praise Jehovah, you who are from the Source of Israel. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>There Benjamin, the youngest, is subduing them, Also the princes of Judah with their noisy crowd, The princes of Zebʹu·lun, the princes of Naphʹta·li. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Your God has decreed that you will be strong. Show your strength, O God, you who have acted in our behalf. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Because of your temple at Jerusalem, Kings will bring gifts to you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Rebuke the wild beasts of the reeds, The assembly of bulls and their calves, Until the peoples bow down bringing* pieces of silver. But he scatters the peoples who delight in war. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Bronze articles will be brought* out of Egypt; Cush will hasten to offer gifts to God. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>O kingdoms of the earth, sing to God, Sing praises* to Jehovah, (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>To the one who rides the ancient heaven of heavens. Look! He thunders with his voice, his mighty voice. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Acknowledge God’s strength. His majesty is over Israel, And his strength is in the skies.* <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>God is awe-inspiring from his* grand sanctuary. He is the God of Israel, Who gives strength and power to the people. Praise to God.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or possibly, “You have given.”</p><p>Or possibly, “in his holy place.”</p><p>Or “Low Plain.”</p><p>Lit., “stronghold.”</p><p>Or possibly, “fortified.”</p><p>Or “grows feeble.”</p><p>Lit., “days.”</p><p>Or “will dwell.”</p><p>Or “Assign.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “my soul waits.”</p><p>Or “secure height.”</p><p>Or possibly, “All of you, as if he were a leaning wall, a stone wall ready to collapse.”</p><p>Or “his dignity.”</p><p>Or “wait silently, O my soul.”</p><p>Or “My soul thirsts.”</p><p>Lit., “My flesh is.”</p><p>Or “My soul is.”</p><p>Lit., “as with fat and fatness.”</p><p>Or “My soul clings.”</p><p>Or “destroy my soul; kill me.”</p><p>Or “foxes.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Or “They encourage one another to do evil.”</p><p>Or “boast.”</p><p>Lit., “all flesh.”</p><p>Or “sanctuary.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “He.”</p><p>Lit., “making it overflow.”</p><p>Or “its ridges.”</p><p>Lit., “drip with fatness.”</p><p>Lit., “dripping.”</p><p>Or “low plains.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Or “sets our soul in life.”</p><p>Or “stagger; totter.”</p><p>Lit., “on our hips.”</p><p>Lit., “our head.”</p><p>Or “my soul.”</p><p>Or “honor.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Or possibly, “on the clouds.”</p><p>“Jah” is a shortened form of the name Jehovah.</p><p>Lit., “judge.”</p><p>Or “rebellious.”</p><p>Lit., “went out before.”</p><p>Lit., “dripped.”</p><p>Lit., “inheritance.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the sheepfolds.”</p><p>Or “yellowish-green.”</p><p>Or “It was as if it snowed in Zalmon.”</p><p>Or “a majestic mountain.”</p><p>Or “desires.”</p><p>Or “walks about.”</p><p>Lit., “In assemblies.”</p><p>Or possibly, “stamping down on.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Ambassadors will come.”</p><p>Or “Make music.”</p><p>Lit., “clouds.”</p><p>Lit., “your.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
