<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 Sample Presentations</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016253.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***wp16 p. 16 What Does the Bible Say?***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<h1 class="featureTtl"><strong>What Does the Bible Say?</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>Is religion man-made?</strong></h2>
<p class="p3"><strong>SOME PEOPLE BELIEVE </strong>that religion is a human invention; others think that God uses religion to help people draw close to him. What do you think?</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p5">There is a “religion that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father.” (<span id="citationsource4"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation4">James 1:27</a>, footnote) Pure, or true, religion comes from God.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p7">  To please God, a religion must be based on Bible truth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource5"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation5">John 4:23, 24</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p8">  Religions based on human ideas are futile.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource6"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation6">Mark 7:7, 8</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>Is it necessary to belong to a religion?</strong></h2>
<p class="p10"><strong>WHAT WOULD YOU SAY?</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p11">  Yes</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p12">  No</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p13">  It depends</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="p14"><strong>WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS</strong></p>
<p class="p15">“Let us consider one another so as to incite to love and fine works, not forsaking our meeting together.” (<span id="citationsource7"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation7">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) God wants his worshippers to gather as an organized group.</p>
<p class="p16"><strong>WHAT ELSE WE LEARN FROM THE BIBLE</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p17">  Those who worship God together should be united in belief.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">1 Corinthians 1:10, 11</a>.</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">  Members of the religion that God approves form a worldwide brotherhood.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">1 Peter 2:17</a>.</p>
</li>
</ul>
</div>
<div class="relatedContent"><p class="p19">For more information, see chapter 15 of this book, <em>What Does the Bible Really Teach?</em><em>, </em>published by Jehovah’s Witnesses</p>
<p class="p20">Also available at www.jw.org</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation4"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource4">^ <strong>(Jas. 1:27)</strong></a> The form of worship* that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation, and to keep oneself without spot from the world.</p><p></p><p>Or “religion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation5"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource5">^ <strong>(John 4:23, 24)</strong></a> Nevertheless, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshippers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for indeed, the Father is looking for ones like these to worship him. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation6"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource6">^ <strong>(Mark 7:7, 8)</strong></a> It is in vain that they keep worshipping me, for they teach commands of men as doctrines.’ <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>You let go of the commandment of God and cling to the tradition of men.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation7"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource7">^ <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong></a> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 1:10, 11)</strong></a> Now I urge you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should all speak in agreement and that there should be no divisions among you, but that you may be completely united in the same mind and in the same line of thought. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For some from the house of Chloʹe have informed me regarding you, my brothers, that there are dissensions among you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:17)</strong></a> Honor men of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers,* be in fear of God, honor the king.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the brotherhood.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016253.xhtml#pcitationsource2">^ <span id="pcitation2"></span><strong>***fg lesson 1 ques. 2***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>2. Why is the good news urgent?</strong></h2>
<p class="p7">Suffering will end only when God clears the earth of bad people. (<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">Zephaniah 2:3</a>) When will that happen? God’s Word foretold the conditions that now threaten mankind. Current events indicate that God’s time to act is close.<wbr />—<em>Read </em><span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11"><em>2 Timothy 3:1-5</em></a><em>.</em></p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Zeph. 2:3)</strong> Seek Jehovah, all you meek ones* of the earth, Who observe his righteous decrees.* Seek righteousness, seek meekness.* Probably* you will be concealed on the day of Jehovah’s anger.</p><p></p><p>Or “humble ones.”</p><p>Lit., “his judgment.”</p><p>Or “humility.”</p><p>Or “It may be that.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:1-5)</strong> But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>betrayers, headstrong, puffed up with pride, lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>having an appearance of godliness but proving false to its power; and from these turn away.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
