<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 7/16 Remember the Works of Jehovah</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016249.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Pss. 74:0-78:72)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>A masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>74 </strong>Why, O God, have you rejected us forever? Why does your anger burn* against the flock of your pasture?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Remember the people* you acquired long ago, The tribe you redeemed as your inheritance. Remember Mount Zion, where you have resided.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins. The enemy has devastated everything in the holy place.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Your foes roared inside your meeting place.* They have set up their own banners as signs there.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>They were like men wielding axes against a thick forest.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>They broke up all its engravings with axes and iron bars.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>They set your sanctuary on fire. They profaned the tabernacle bearing your name, casting it to the ground.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>They and their offspring have said in their hearts: “All the meeting places of God* in the land must be burned.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>There are no signs for us to see; There is no longer any prophet, And no one among us knows how long this will last. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>How long, O God, will the adversary keep taunting? Will the enemy treat your name with disrespect forever? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand? Draw it out of your bosom* and put an end to them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>But God is my King from long ago, The one performing acts of salvation on the earth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>You stirred up the sea with your strength; You smashed the heads of the sea monsters in the waters. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You crushed the heads of Le·viʹa·than;* You gave it as food to the people, to those inhabiting the deserts. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>You cut openings for the springs and the streams; You dried up ever-flowing rivers. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The day belongs to you, also the night. You made the light* and the sun. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>You set up all the boundaries of the earth; You made summer and winter. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Remember the enemy’s taunts, O Jehovah, How a foolish people treats your name with disrespect. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Do not surrender the life* of your turtledove to the wild beasts. Do not forget the life of your afflicted people forever. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Remember the covenant, For the dark places of the earth have become full of the haunts of violence. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>May the crushed one not turn away disappointed; May the lowly and the poor praise your name. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Rise up, O God, and plead your legal case. Remember how the foolish taunt you all day long. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Do not forget what your foes are saying. The uproar of those who defy you is ascending constantly. </p><p>To the director. Set to the melody “Do Not Bring to Ruin.” Of Aʹsaph. A song. <strong>75 </strong>We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks to you; Your name is near, And people declare your wondrous works.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>You say: “When I set a time, I judge with fairness.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When the earth and all its inhabitants were dissolved, It was I who kept its pillars firm.” (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,” And to the wicked, “Do not exalt your strength.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Do not exalt your strength* up high Or speak with arrogance.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For exaltation does not come From the east or the west or the south.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For God is Judge. He puts one man down and exalts another.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>For there is a cup in Jehovah’s hand; The wine is foaming and is fully mixed. He will surely pour it out, And all the wicked of the earth will drink it, down to the dregs.”  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>But as for me, I will proclaim it forever; I will sing praises* to the God of Jacob. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For he says: “I will cut off all the strength* of the wicked, But the strength* of the righteous will be exalted.” </p><p>To the director; to be accompanied with stringed instruments. A melody of Aʹsaph. A song. <strong>76 </strong>God is known in Judah; In Israel his name is great.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>His shelter is in Saʹlem, And his dwelling is in Zion.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>There he broke the flaming arrows of the bow, The shield and the sword and the weapons of war. (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You shine brightly;* You are more majestic than the mountains of prey.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The courageous of heart have been plundered. They have fallen asleep; The warriors were all helpless.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>From your rebuke, O God of Jacob, Both the charioteer and the horse have fallen fast asleep.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>You alone are awe-inspiring. Who can withstand your intense anger?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>From heaven you pronounced judgment; The earth was afraid and was silent  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>When God rose up to execute judgment, To save all the meek of the earth. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>For the rage of man will serve to your praise; With the remnants of their rage you will adorn yourself. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Make your vows to Jehovah your God and pay them, Let all who are around him bring their gift in fear. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He will humble the pride* of leaders; He inspires fear in the kings of the earth. </p><p>To the director; on Je·duʹthun.* Of Aʹsaph. A melody. <strong>77 </strong>With my voice I will cry out to God; To God I will cry out, and he will hear me.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In the day of my distress I search for Jehovah. At night my hands are stretched out to him without ceasing.* I* cannot be comforted.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>When I remember God, I groan; I am troubled and my strength fails.* (<em>Selah</em>)  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>You hold my eyelids open; I am agitated and cannot speak.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>My thoughts turn to the days of long ago, The years of the distant past.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>During the night I remember my song;* I ponder in my heart; I make* a diligent search.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Will Jehovah cast us off forever? Will he never again show his favor?  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Has his loyal love ceased forever? Will his promise come to nothing for all generations?  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Has God forgotten to show his favor, Or has his anger caused his mercy to cease? (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Must I keep saying: “This is what distresses me:* The Most High has changed his position* toward us”? <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I will remember the works of Jah; I will remember your marvelous deeds of long ago. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>O God, your ways are holy. What god is as great as you, O God? <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You are the true God, who does marvelous things. You have revealed your strength to the peoples. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>With your power* you have rescued* your people, The sons of Jacob and of Joseph. (<em>Selah</em>) <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The waters saw you, O God; The waters saw you and were disturbed. And the deep waters became agitated. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The clouds poured down water. The cloudy skies thundered, And your arrows flew here and there. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The sound of your thunder was like chariot wheels; Flashes of lightning lit up the inhabited earth;* The earth trembled and quaked. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Your way was through the sea, Your path through many waters; But your footprints could not be traced. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>You led your people just like a flock, In the care* of Moses and Aaron. </p><p>Masʹkil.* Of Aʹsaph. <strong>78 </strong>Listen, my people, to my law;* Incline your ear to the words of my mouth.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will open my mouth in a proverb. I will propound riddles of long ago.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The things we have heard and know, Which our fathers have related to us,  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>We will not hide from their sons; We will relate to the generation to come The praiseworthy deeds of Jehovah and his strength, The wonderful things he has done.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>He established a reminder in Jacob And set a law in Israel; He commanded our forefathers To make these things known to their children,  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>So that the next generation, The children yet to be born, might know them. They in turn would relate them to their children.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then these would put their confidence in God. They would not forget God’s works But would observe his commandments.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Then they would not be like their forefathers, A stubborn and rebellious generation, A generation whose heart was unsteady* And whose spirit was not faithful to God.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The Eʹphra·im·ites were armed with the bow, But they retreated in the day of battle. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They did not keep the covenant of God And refused to walk in his law. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>They also forgot what he had done, His wonderful works that he showed them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>He did marvelous things in the sight of their forefathers, In the land of Egypt, the region of Zoʹan. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He split the sea to let them pass through, And he made the waters stand up like a dam.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>He led them with a cloud by day And the whole night with the light of a fire. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He split rocks in the wilderness, He let them drink their fill as if from deep waters. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>He brought streams out of a crag And caused waters to flow down like rivers. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But they continued to sin against him By rebelling against the Most High in the desert; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>They challenged* God in their heart By demanding food that they craved.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>So they spoke against God, Saying: “Can God spread a table in the wilderness?” <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Look! He struck a rock So that waters flowed and streams flooded out. “Can he also give us bread, Or can he provide meat for his people?” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>When Jehovah heard them, he became furious; A fire blazed against Jacob, And his anger flared up against Israel <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Because they did not put faith in God; They did not trust in his ability to save them. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>So he commanded the cloudy skies above, And he opened the doors of heaven. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>He kept raining down manna for them to eat; He gave them the grain of heaven. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Men ate the bread of mighty ones;* He provided enough to satisfy them. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>He stirred up the east wind in the heavens And made a south wind blow by his power. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>And he rained down meat on them like dust, Birds like the sand of the seashore. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He made them fall in the midst of his camp, All around his tents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>And they ate and gorged themselves; He gave them what they desired. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>But before they fully satisfied their craving, While their food was yet in their mouth, <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>God’s wrath flared up against them. He put to death their strongest men; He brought down the young men of Israel. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Despite this they sinned even more And did not put faith in his wonderful works. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>So he brought their days to an end as if a mere breath, And their years by sudden terrors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>But as often as he killed them, they would search for him; They would return and look for God, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Remembering that God was their Rock And that the Most High God was their Redeemer.* <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But they tried to deceive him with their mouth And lied to him with their tongue. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Their heart was not steadfast toward him; And they were not faithful to his covenant. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>But he was merciful; He would forgive* their error and not bring them to ruin. He often held back his anger Instead of stirring up all his wrath. <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>For he remembered that they were flesh, A wind that blows past and does not return.* <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness And made him feel hurt in the desert! <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Again and again they put God to the test, And they grieved* the Holy One of Israel. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>They did not remember his power,* The day that he rescued* them from the adversary, <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>How he displayed his signs in Egypt And his miracles in the region of Zoʹan, <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>And how he turned the Nile canals into blood So that they could not drink from their streams. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>He sent swarms of gadflies to devour them And frogs to bring them to ruin. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>He gave their crops to the voracious locusts, The fruit of their labor to the swarming locusts. <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>He destroyed their vines with hail And their sycamore trees with hailstones. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>He gave their beasts of burden over to the hail And their livestock to the lightning bolts.* <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>He inflicted his burning anger on them, Fury and indignation and distress, Companies of angels bringing calamity. <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>He cleared a pathway for his anger. He did not spare them* from death; And he gave them* over to pestilence. <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>Finally he struck down all the firstborn of Egypt, The beginning of their procreative power in the tents of Ham. <strong><sup>52 </sup></strong>Then he brought his people out like a flock And guided them like a drove in the wilderness. <strong><sup>53 </sup></strong>He led them in security, And they felt no fear; The sea covered their enemies. <strong><sup>54 </sup></strong>And he brought them to his holy territory, This mountainous region that his right hand acquired. <strong><sup>55 </sup></strong>He drove out the nations from before them; He allotted to them an inheritance by the measuring line; He settled the tribes of Israel in their homes. <strong><sup>56 </sup></strong>But they kept challenging* God the Most High, and rebelling against him; They did not pay attention to his reminders. <strong><sup>57 </sup></strong>They also turned away and were as treacherous as their forefathers. They were as unreliable as a loose bow. <strong><sup>58 </sup></strong>They kept offending him with their high places, And they incited him to fury* with their carved images. <strong><sup>59 </sup></strong>God heard and became furious, So he utterly rejected Israel. <strong><sup>60 </sup></strong>He finally forsook the tabernacle of Shiʹloh, The tent where he had resided among men. <strong><sup>61 </sup></strong>He let the symbol of his strength go into captivity; His splendor into the hand of the adversary. <strong><sup>62 </sup></strong>He handed his people over to the sword And became furious with his inheritance. <strong><sup>63 </sup></strong>Fire consumed his young men, And to his virgins no wedding songs were sung.* <strong><sup>64 </sup></strong>His priests fell by the sword, And their own widows did not weep. <strong><sup>65 </sup></strong>Then Jehovah woke up as from sleep, Like a mighty man waking up from wine. <strong><sup>66 </sup></strong>And he drove his adversaries back; He put them to lasting disgrace. <strong><sup>67 </sup></strong>He rejected the tent of Joseph; He did not choose the tribe of Eʹphra·im. <strong><sup>68 </sup></strong>But he chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which he loves. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>He made his sanctuary as enduring as the heavens,* Like the earth that he has established forever. <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>He chose David his servant And took him from the sheep pens, <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>From tending the nursing ewes; He made him the shepherd over Jacob, his people, And over Israel, his inheritance. <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>He shepherded them with integrity of heart, And with skillful hands he led them.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “smoke.”</p><p>Lit., “your assembly.”</p><p>Or “your place of assembly.”</p><p>Or “All places where God is worshipped.”</p><p>Or “from the folds of your garment.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the luminary.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Lit., “horn.”</p><p>Or “make music.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Lit., “horns.”</p><p>Or “You are enveloped with light.”</p><p>Lit., “spirit.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “growing numb.”</p><p>Or “My soul.”</p><p>Lit., “my spirit faints.”</p><p>Or “string music.”</p><p>Lit., “My spirit makes.”</p><p>Or “pierces me.”</p><p>Lit., “right hand.”</p><p>Lit., “arm.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or “the productive land.”</p><p>Lit., “By the hand.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “instruction.”</p><p>Lit., “unprepared.”</p><p>Or “wall.”</p><p>Lit., “tested.”</p><p>Or “food for their soul.”</p><p>Or “of angels.”</p><p>Or “Avenger.”</p><p>Lit., “cover.”</p><p>Or possibly, “That the spirit is going forth and does not come back.”</p><p>Or “pained.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Lit., “redeemed.”</p><p>Or possibly, “the burning fever.”</p><p>Or “their soul.”</p><p>Lit., “their life.”</p><p>Or “testing.”</p><p>Or “to jealousy.”</p><p>Lit., “And his virgins were not praised.”</p><p>Lit., “He built his sanctuary like the heights.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
