<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 October 10-16</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016365.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:1-11:31)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>My son, keep my sayings, And treasure up my commandments.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Keep my commandments and live; Guard my instruction* like the pupil of your eye.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Tie them around your fingers; Write them on the tablet of your heart.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>To guard you against the wayward* woman, Against the immoral* woman and her smooth* words.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>From the window of my house, Through my lattice, I looked down,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And as I observed the naive* ones, I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He passed along the street near her corner, And he marched in the direction of her house  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>In the twilight, in the evening, At the approach of night and darkness. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then I saw a woman meet him, Dressed like* a prostitute, with a cunning heart. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>She is loud and defiant. She never stays* at home. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares, She lurks near every corner. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you! <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>And now, my sons, listen to me; Pay attention to the words I speak. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For she has caused many to fall down slain, And those she has killed are numerous. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Her house leads to the Grave;* It goes down to the inner chambers of death. </p><p><strong>8 </strong>Is not wisdom calling out? Is not discernment raising its voice?  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>On the heights along the road, It takes its position at the crossroads.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Next to the gates leading into the city, At the entrances of the doorways, It keeps crying out loudly:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“To you, O people, I am calling; I raise my voice to everyone.*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You inexperienced ones, learn shrewdness; You stupid ones, acquire an understanding heart.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Listen, for what I say is important, My lips speak what is right;  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For my mouth softly utters truth, And my lips detest what is wicked.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All the sayings of my mouth are righteous. None of them are twisted or crooked.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They are all straightforward to the discerning And right to those who have found knowledge. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Take my discipline instead of silver, And knowledge rather than the finest gold, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For wisdom is better than corals;* All other desirable things cannot compare to it. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness; I have found knowledge and thinking ability. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I possess good advice and practical wisdom; Understanding and power are mine. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>By me kings keep reigning, And high officials decree righteousness. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>By me princes keep ruling, And nobles judge in righteousness. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I love those loving me, And those seeking me will find me. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Riches and glory are with me, Lasting wealth* and righteousness. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold, And what I produce is better than the finest silver. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I walk in the path of righteousness, In the middle of the pathways of justice; <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>I give a rich inheritance to those who love me, And I fill up their storehouses. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way, The earliest of his achievements of long ago. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>From ancient times* I was installed, From the start, from times earlier than the earth. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth,* When there were no springs overflowing with water. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Before the mountains were set in place, Before the hills, I was brought forth, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When he had not yet made the earth and its fields Or the first clods of earth’s soil. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When he prepared the heavens, I was there; When he marked out the horizon* on the surface of the waters, <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>When he established* the clouds above, When he founded the fountains of the deep, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>When he set a decree for the sea That its waters should not pass beyond his order, When he established* the foundations of the earth, <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then I was beside him as a master worker. I was the one he was especially fond of day by day; I rejoiced before him all the time; <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I rejoiced over his habitable earth, And I was especially fond of the sons of men.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>And now, my sons, listen to me; Yes, happy are those who keep my ways. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Listen to discipline and become wise, And never neglect it. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who listens to me By coming early to* my doors day by day, By waiting next to my doorposts; <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For the one finding me will find life, And he receives approval from Jehovah. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But the one who ignores me harms himself,* And those who hate me love death.” </p><p><strong>9 </strong>True wisdom has built its house; It has carved* out its seven pillars.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It has fully prepared its meat;* It has mixed its wine; It has also arranged its table.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It has sent out its female servants To call out from the heights above the city:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to the one lacking good sense:*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>“Come, eat my bread And share in drinking the wine that I have mixed.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Leave behind your inexperience* and live; Walk forward in the way of understanding.”  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor, And whoever reproves someone wicked will get hurt.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser. Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>For by me your days will be many, And years will be added to your life. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage, But if you are a ridiculer, you alone will bear it. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A stupid woman is loud. She is ignorant and knows absolutely nothing. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>She sits at the entrance of her house On a seat in the high places of the city, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Calling out to those passing by, To those walking straight ahead on their way: <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to those lacking good sense:* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“Stolen waters are sweet, And food eaten in secret is pleasant.” <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But he does not know that those powerless in death are there, That her guests are in the depths of the Grave.* </p><p><strong>10 </strong>Proverbs of Solʹo·mon. A wise son makes his father rejoice, But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>The treasures gained by wickedness will be of no benefit, But righteousness is what rescues from death.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Jehovah will not cause the righteous one* to go hungry, But he will deny the wicked what they crave.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Idle hands will cause poverty, But diligent hands bring riches.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The son acting with insight gathers the crop in summer, But the son acting shamefully is fast asleep during the harvest.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Blessings are on the head of the righteous one, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The memory* of the righteous one is due for a blessing, But the name of the wicked will rot.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The wisehearted person will accept instructions,* But the one speaking foolishly will be trodden down.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The one walking in integrity will walk in security, But the one making his ways crooked will be found out. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The one who slyly winks his eye causes grief, And the one who speaks foolishly will be trodden down. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>The mouth of the righteous one is a source of life, But the mouth of the wicked conceals violence. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Hatred is what stirs up contentions, But love covers over all transgressions. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning person, But the rod is for the back of one lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Those who are wise treasure up knowledge, But the mouth of the fool invites ruin. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The wealth* of a rich man is his fortified city. The ruin of the poor is their poverty. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>The activity of the righteous one leads to life; But the produce of the wicked one leads to sin. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>The one who heeds discipline is a path to life,* But the one who ignores reproof leads others astray. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The one who conceals his hatred speaks lies, And the one spreading malicious reports* is stupid. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>When words are many, transgression cannot be avoided, But whoever controls his lips acts discreetly. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>The tongue of the righteous one is like the finest silver, But the heart of the wicked one is worth little. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The lips of the righteous one nourish* many, But the foolish die for lack of sense. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, And He adds no pain* with it. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Engaging in shameful conduct is like a game to the stupid one, But wisdom is for the man of discernment. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>What the wicked one fears will come upon him; But the desire of the righteous will be granted. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>When the storm passes by, the wicked one will be no more, But the righteous one is a foundation forever. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, So the lazy person is to the one who sends him.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah prolongs life, But the years of the wicked will be cut short. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The expectation* of the righteous brings joy, But the hope of the wicked will perish. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>The way of Jehovah is a stronghold for the blameless one, But it means ruin for evildoers. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The righteous one will never be made to fall, But the wicked will no longer inhabit the earth. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>The mouth of the righteous one produces* wisdom, But the perverse tongue will be cut off. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>The lips of the righteous one know what is pleasing, But the mouth of the wicked is perverse. </p><p><strong>11 </strong>Dishonest* scales are detestable to Jehovah, But an accurate weight* brings pleasure to him.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>When presumptuousness comes, dishonor will follow, But wisdom is with the modest ones.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>The integrity of the upright is what guides them, But the deviousness of the treacherous will destroy them.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Wealth* will be of no benefit on the day of fury, But righteousness is what will rescue from death.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>The righteousness of the blameless one makes his path straight, But the wicked one will fall because of his own wickedness.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>The righteousness of the upright will rescue them, But the treacherous will be caught by their own desires.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When a wicked man dies, his hope perishes; And expectations based on his power also perish.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The righteous one is rescued from distress, And the wicked one takes his place.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>By his mouth the apostate* brings his neighbor to ruin, But by knowledge the righteous are rescued. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>The goodness of the righteous makes a city rejoice, And when the wicked perish, there is a joyful cry. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Because of the blessing of the upright a city is exalted, But the mouth of the wicked tears it down. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>Whoever is lacking good sense* shows contempt for* his neighbor, But the man of true discernment remains silent. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>A slanderer goes about revealing confidential talk, But the trustworthy person* keeps a confidence.* <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>When there is no skillful direction,* the people fall, But there is success* through many advisers.* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Whoever guarantees a loan* for a stranger is sure to fare badly, But whoever avoids* shaking hands in a pledge will be secure. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>A gracious* woman acquires glory, But ruthless men seize riches. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>A kind man* benefits himself,* But the cruel person brings trouble* on himself. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>The wicked one earns deceptive wages, But the one who sows righteousness receives a true reward. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The one standing firmly for righteousness is in line for life, But the one chasing after evil is in line for death. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Those crooked at heart are detestable to Jehovah, But those whose way is blameless bring pleasure to him. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Be assured of this:* An evil person will not go unpunished, But the children of the righteous will escape. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Like a gold ring in the snout of a pig Is a beautiful woman who rejects good sense. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>The desire of the righteous leads to good, But what the wicked hope for leads to fury. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>One gives generously* and ends up with more; Another withholds what should be given, but he comes to poverty. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>The generous person* will prosper,* And whoever refreshes* others will himself be refreshed. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>The people will curse the one who withholds grain, But they will bless the one who sells it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>The one who diligently seeks to do good seeks favor, But the one searching for bad—that is what will surely come upon him. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>The one trusting in his riches will fall, But the righteous will flourish like the foliage. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Anyone who brings trouble* on his household will inherit the wind, And the fool will be a servant to the wisehearted one. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>The fruitage of the righteous one is a tree of life, And the one who wins souls* is wise. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>If, indeed, the righteous one on earth is rewarded, How much more the wicked one and the sinner!</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “with the garment of.”</p><p>Lit., “Her feet never stay.”</p><p>Or “fetters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “to the sons of men.”</p><p>Lit., “understand heart.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Hereditary values.”</p><p>Or “From time immemorial.”</p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Lit., “a circle.”</p><p>Lit., “made strong.”</p><p>Or “decreed.”</p><p>Or “mankind.”</p><p>Or “By keeping awake at.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “hewed.”</p><p>Lit., “She has slaughtered her slaughtering.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “the inexperienced ones.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the soul of the righteous one.”</p><p>Or “reputation.”</p><p>Lit., “commandments.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “valuable thing.”</p><p>Or possibly, “is on the path to life.”</p><p>Or “rumors.”</p><p>Or “guide.”</p><p>Or “sorrow; hardship.”</p><p>Or “to his employer.”</p><p>Or “hope.”</p><p>Or “bears the fruit of.”</p><p>Or “Cheating.”</p><p>Or “a complete stone weight.”</p><p>Or “Valuable things.”</p><p>Or “godless man.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “despises.”</p><p>Lit., “the one faithful in spirit.”</p><p>Lit., “covers over a matter.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “salvation.”</p><p>Or “counselors.”</p><p>Or “puts up security.”</p><p>Lit., “hates.”</p><p>Or “charming.”</p><p>Or “A man of loyal love.”</p><p>Or “does good to his soul.”</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>Lit., “Hand to hand.”</p><p>Lit., “scatters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “will be made fat.”</p><p>Lit., “freely waters.”</p><p>Or “disgrace.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016365.xhtml#citationsource3">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:13-23)</strong></a> <span id="citation3"></span>She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you! <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.” <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “fetters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016365.xhtml#citationsource8">^ <strong>(Prov. 8:22-9:6)</strong></a> <span id="citation8"></span>Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way, The earliest of his achievements of long ago. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>From ancient times* I was installed, From the start, from times earlier than the earth. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When there were no deep waters, I was brought forth,* When there were no springs overflowing with water. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Before the mountains were set in place, Before the hills, I was brought forth, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When he had not yet made the earth and its fields Or the first clods of earth’s soil. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When he prepared the heavens, I was there; When he marked out the horizon* on the surface of the waters, <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>When he established* the clouds above, When he founded the fountains of the deep, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>When he set a decree for the sea That its waters should not pass beyond his order, When he established* the foundations of the earth, <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then I was beside him as a master worker. I was the one he was especially fond of day by day; I rejoiced before him all the time; <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I rejoiced over his habitable earth, And I was especially fond of the sons of men.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>And now, my sons, listen to me; Yes, happy are those who keep my ways. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Listen to discipline and become wise, And never neglect it. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who listens to me By coming early to* my doors day by day, By waiting next to my doorposts; <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For the one finding me will find life, And he receives approval from Jehovah. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>But the one who ignores me harms himself,* And those who hate me love death.” </p><p><strong>9 </strong>True wisdom has built its house; It has carved* out its seven pillars.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>It has fully prepared its meat;* It has mixed its wine; It has also arranged its table.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>It has sent out its female servants To call out from the heights above the city:  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to the one lacking good sense:*  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>“Come, eat my bread And share in drinking the wine that I have mixed.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Leave behind your inexperience* and live; Walk forward in the way of understanding.”</p><p></p><p>Or “From time immemorial.”</p><p>Or “brought forth as with labor pains.”</p><p>Lit., “a circle.”</p><p>Lit., “made strong.”</p><p>Or “decreed.”</p><p>Or “mankind.”</p><p>Or “By keeping awake at.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “hewed.”</p><p>Lit., “She has slaughtered her slaughtering.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “the inexperienced ones.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 32 Be Steadfast, Unmovable!***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 32</p>
<h1><strong>Be Steadfast, Unmovable!</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10">1 Corinthians 15:58</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Nations are troubled as never before.</p>
<p class="p5">People are fearful of what lies in store.</p>
<p class="p6">Firm and unmovable we need to be,</p>
<p class="p7">Serving our God faithfully.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p8">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p9">Steadfast we all need to be;</p>
<p class="p10">Far from this world we keep free,</p>
<p class="p11">As we feed on God’s truth and keep integrity<em>.</em></p>
</div>
<p class="p12">2. Snares of this world and temptations abound.</p>
<p class="p13">We can resist if our thinking is sound.</p>
<p class="p14">If we hold fast to what God says is true,</p>
<p class="p15">Safely he’ll carry us through.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p16">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p17">Steadfast we all need to be;</p>
<p class="p18">Far from this world we keep free,</p>
<p class="p19">As we feed on God’s truth and keep integrity<em>.</em></p>
</div>
<p class="p20">3. Give to God worship that comes from the heart.</p>
<p class="p21">In the Lord’s service may we have a part.</p>
<p class="p22">Preach the good news, always holding it fast.</p>
<p class="p23">Soon the last days will have passed.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p24">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p25">Steadfast we all need to be;</p>
<p class="p26">Far from this world we keep free,</p>
<p class="p27">As we feed on God’s truth and keep integrity<em>.</em></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p28">(See also <span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">Luke 21:9;</a><span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12"> 1 Pet. 4:7</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 15:58)</strong></a> Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Luke 21:9)</strong></a> Furthermore, when you hear of wars and disturbances,* do not be terrified. For these things must take place first, but the end will not occur immediately.”</p><p></p><p>Or “disorders; uprisings.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 4:7)</strong></a> But the end of all things has drawn close. Therefore, be sound in mind, and be vigilant* with a view to prayers.</p><p></p><p>Or “alert; awake.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w00 11/15 pp. 29-30 “Keep My Commandments and Continue Living”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p8">a need to treat such instructions “like the pupil of your eyes”<wbr />—guarding them with utmost care. That is the way to avoid the deadly effect of ignoring Jehovah’s standards and thus to “continue living.”</p>
<p class="p9"><em>“Tie them </em>[<em>my commandments</em>] <em>upon your fingers,” </em>continues Solomon, <em>“and write them upon the tablet of your heart.” </em>(<span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">Proverbs 7:3</a>) As fingers are prominently before our eyes and are vital in carrying out our purposes, the lessons learned from a Scriptural upbringing or the gaining of Bible knowledge are to be a constant reminder and guide in everything we do. We are to inscribe them upon the tablet of our heart, making them a part of our nature.</p>
<p class="p10">Not forgetting the importance of wisdom and understanding, the king exhorts: <em>“Say to wisdom: ‘You are my sister’; and may you call understanding itself ‘Kinswoman.’” </em>(<span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">Proverbs 7:4</a>) Wisdom is the ability to put God-given knowledge to proper use. We should have affection for wisdom as for a dearly loved sister. What is understanding? It is the ability to see into a matter and get the sense of it by grasping the connections between its parts and the whole. Understanding must be as close to us as an intimate friend.</p>
<p class="p11">Why should we adhere to Scriptural training and cultivate closeness with wisdom and understanding? So as <em>“to guard </em>[<em>ourselves</em>] <em>against the woman stranger, against the foreigner who has made her own sayings smooth.” </em>(<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Proverbs 7:5</a>) Yes, doing so will protect us from the smooth and persuasive ways of a stranger, or foreigner<wbr />—an immoral person.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a></p>
<p class="p12"><strong>The Young Man Meets ‘a Cunning Woman’</strong></p>
<p class="p13">The king of Israel next describes a scene that he himself has observed: <em>“At the window of my house, through my lattice I looked down,</em> <em>that I might peer upon the inexperienced ones. I was interested in discerning among the sons a young man in want of heart,</em> <em>passing along on the street near her corner, and in the way to her house he marches,</em> <em>in the twilight, in the evening of the day, at the approach of the night and the gloom.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Proverbs 7:6-9</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">The window through which Solomon looks out has a lattice<wbr />—apparently a framework with laths and perhaps elaborate carvings. As the twilight fades, the darkness of the night pours into the streets. He catches sight of a young man who is particularly vulnerable. Lacking discernment, or good sense, he is in want of heart. Likely, he is aware of the type of neighborhood he has entered and what could happen to him there. The young man comes near “her corner,” which is on the way to her house. Who is she? What is she up to?</p>
<p class="p15">The observant king continues: <em>“Look! there was a woman to meet him, with the garment of a prostitute and cunning of heart.</em> <em>She is boisterous and stubborn. In her house her feet do not keep residing.</em> <em>Now she is outdoors, now she is in the public squares, and near every corner she lies in wait.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17">Proverbs 7:10-12</a>.</p>
<p class="p16">This woman’s manner of dress speaks volumes about her. (<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Genesis 38:14, 15</a>) She is dressed immodestly, like a prostitute. Moreover, she is cunning of heart<wbr />—her mind is “treacherous,” her intent “crafty.” (<em>An American Translation; New International Version</em>) She is boisterous and stubborn, talkative and headstrong, loud and self-willed, brazen and defiant. Rather than staying at home, she prefers to frequent public places, lurking on street corners to pick up her prey. She is waiting for someone like the young man.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>An ‘Abundance of Persuasiveness’</strong></p>
<p class="p18">A young man thus meets a loose woman with a crafty plan. How this must have caught the attention of Solomon! He relates: <em>“She has grabbed hold of him and given him a kiss. She has put on a bold face, and she begins to say to him:</em> <em>‘Communion sacrifices were incumbent upon me. Today I have paid my vows.</em> <em>That is why I have come out to meet you, to look for your face, that I may find you.’”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Proverbs 7:13-15</a>.</p>
<p class="p19">The lips of this woman are smooth. Putting on a bold face, she utters her words confidently. Everything she says is carefully calculated to seduce the young man. By stating that she had made communion sacrifices that very day and paid her vows, she makes a display of righteousness, hinting that she is not lacking in spirituality. Communion sacrifices at the temple in Jerusalem consisted of meat, flour, oil, and wine. (<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Leviticus 19:5, 6;</a><span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21"> 22:21;</a><span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22"> Numbers 15:8-10</a>) Since the offerer could take part of the communion sacrifice for himself and his family, she thus suggests that there is plenty to eat and drink at her house. The implication is clear: The young man would have a good time there. She has come out of her house specifically to look for him. How touching<wbr />—if anyone could swallow such a story. “It is true she was out looking for someone,” says one Bible scholar, “but did she really come looking just for this one special fellow? Only a fool<wbr />—perhaps this one—<wbr />would believe her.”</p>
<p class="p20">After making herself appealing by the sight of her attire, by the sound of her flattering words, by the touch of her embrace, and by the taste of her lips, the seductress enlists the sense of smell. She says: <em>“With coverlets I have bedecked my divan, with many-colored things, linen of Egypt. I have besprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes and cinnamon.” </em>(<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Proverbs 7:16, 17</a>) She has aesthetically prepared her bed with colorful linen from Egypt and perfumed it with choice fragrances of myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.</p>
<p class="p21"><em>“Do come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning,” </em>she continues, <em>“do let us enjoy each other with love expressions.” </em>The invitation is to something much more than a pleasant dinner for two. Her promise is that of enjoying sexual intimacy. To the young man, the appeal is adventurous and exciting! As further inducement, she adds: <em>“For the husband is not in his house; he has gone traveling on a way of some distance. A bag of money he has taken in his hand. On the day of the full moon he will come to his house.” </em>(<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Proverbs 7:18-20</a>) They would be perfectly safe, she assures him, for her husband is away on a business trip and is not expected back for some time. How talented she is at beguiling a young person! <em>“She has misled him by the abundance of her persuasiveness. By the smoothness of her lips she seduces him.” </em>(<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Proverbs 7:21</a>) It would take a man of Joseph’s caliber to resist an appeal </p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:3)</strong></a> Tie them around your fingers; Write them on the tablet of your heart.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:4)</strong></a> Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:5)</strong></a> To guard you against the wayward* woman, Against the immoral* woman and her smooth* words.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:6-9)</strong></a> From the window of my house, Through my lattice, I looked down,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And as I observed the naive* ones, I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He passed along the street near her corner, And he marched in the direction of her house  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>In the twilight, in the evening, At the approach of night and darkness.</p><p></p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:10-12)</strong></a> Then I saw a woman meet him, Dressed like* a prostitute, with a cunning heart. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>She is loud and defiant. She never stays* at home. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares, She lurks near every corner.</p><p></p><p>Or “with the garment of.”</p><p>Lit., “Her feet never stay.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Gen. 38:14, 15)</strong></a> With that she removed her widow’s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of E·naʹim, which is on the road to Timʹnah, for she saw that Sheʹlah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:13-15)</strong></a> She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Lev. 19:5, 6)</strong></a> “‘Now if you offer a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it in such a way that you gain approval for yourselves. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>It should be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the next day, but what is left over until the third day should be burned in the fire.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Lev. 22:21)</strong></a> “‘If a man presents a communion sacrifice to Jehovah to pay a vow or as a voluntary offering, it should be a sound animal from the herd or the flock, in order to gain approval. No defect at all should be in it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Num. 15:8-10)</strong></a> “‘But if you should offer a male of the herd as a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or communion sacrifices to Jehovah, <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>you should also present together with the male of the herd a grain offering of three tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You should also present wine as a drink offering, half a hin, as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing* aroma to Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “appeasing; soothing.” Lit., “restful.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:16, 17)</strong></a> I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:18-20)</strong></a> Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:21)</strong></a> She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> The word “stranger” was applied to those who alienated themselves from Jehovah by turning away from the Law. Thus, an immoral female, such as a prostitute, is referred to as a “woman stranger.”</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w00 11/15 pp. 30-31 “Keep My Commandments and Continue Living”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p14">what could happen to him there. The young man comes near “her corner,” which is on the way to her house. Who is she? What is she up to?</p>
<p class="p15">The observant king continues: <em>“Look! there was a woman to meet him, with the garment of a prostitute and cunning of heart.</em> <em>She is boisterous and stubborn. In her house her feet do not keep residing.</em> <em>Now she is outdoors, now she is in the public squares, and near every corner she lies in wait.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Proverbs 7:10-12</a>.</p>
<p class="p16">This woman’s manner of dress speaks volumes about her. (<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Genesis 38:14, 15</a>) She is dressed immodestly, like a prostitute. Moreover, she is cunning of heart<wbr />—her mind is “treacherous,” her intent “crafty.” (<em>An American Translation; New International Version</em>) She is boisterous and stubborn, talkative and headstrong, loud and self-willed, brazen and defiant. Rather than staying at home, she prefers to frequent public places, lurking on street corners to pick up her prey. She is waiting for someone like the young man.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>An ‘Abundance of Persuasiveness’</strong></p>
<p class="p18">A young man thus meets a loose woman with a crafty plan. How this must have caught the attention of Solomon! He relates: <em>“She has grabbed hold of him and given him a kiss. She has put on a bold face, and she begins to say to him:</em> <em>‘Communion sacrifices were incumbent upon me. Today I have paid my vows.</em> <em>That is why I have come out to meet you, to look for your face, that I may find you.’”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28">Proverbs 7:13-15</a>.</p>
<p class="p19">The lips of this woman are smooth. Putting on a bold face, she utters her words confidently. Everything she says is carefully calculated to seduce the young man. By stating that she had made communion sacrifices that very day and paid her vows, she makes a display of righteousness, hinting that she is not lacking in spirituality. Communion sacrifices at the temple in Jerusalem consisted of meat, flour, oil, and wine. (<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Leviticus 19:5, 6;</a><span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30"> 22:21;</a><span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31"> Numbers 15:8-10</a>) Since the offerer could take part of the communion sacrifice for himself and his family, she thus suggests that there is plenty to eat and drink at her house. The implication is clear: The young man would have a good time there. She has come out of her house specifically to look for him. How touching<wbr />—if anyone could swallow such a story. “It is true she was out looking for someone,” says one Bible scholar, “but did she really come looking just for this one special fellow? Only a fool<wbr />—perhaps this one—<wbr />would believe her.”</p>
<p class="p20">After making herself appealing by the sight of her attire, by the sound of her flattering words, by the touch of her embrace, and by the taste of her lips, the seductress enlists the sense of smell. She says: <em>“With coverlets I have bedecked my divan, with many-colored things, linen of Egypt. I have besprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes and cinnamon.” </em>(<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Proverbs 7:16, 17</a>) She has aesthetically prepared her bed with colorful linen from Egypt and perfumed it with choice fragrances of myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.</p>
<p class="p21"><em>“Do come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning,” </em>she continues, <em>“do let us enjoy each other with love expressions.” </em>The invitation is to something much more than a pleasant dinner for two. Her promise is that of enjoying sexual intimacy. To the young man, the appeal is adventurous and exciting! As further inducement, she adds: <em>“For the husband is not in his house; he has gone traveling on a way of some distance. A bag of money he has taken in his hand. On the day of the full moon he will come to his house.” </em>(<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Proverbs 7:18-20</a>) They would be perfectly safe, she assures him, for her husband is away on a business trip and is not expected back for some time. How talented she is at beguiling a young person! <em>“She has misled him by the abundance of her persuasiveness. By the smoothness of her lips she seduces him.” </em>(<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Proverbs 7:21</a>) It would take a man of Joseph’s caliber to resist an appeal this enticing. (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Genesis 39:9,</a><span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36"> 12</a>) Does this young man measure up?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong>‘Like a Bull to the Slaughter’</strong></p>
<p class="p23"><em>“All of a sudden he is going after her,” </em>reports Solomon, <em>“like a bull that comes even to the slaughter, and just as if fettered for the discipline of a foolish man,</em> <em>until an arrow cleaves open his liver, just as a bird hastens into the trap, and he has not known that it involves his very soul.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Proverbs 7:22, 23</a>.</p>
<p class="p24">The invitation proves to be irresistible to the young man. Throwing all good sense to the wind, he goes after her ‘like a bull to the slaughter.’ As a man in fetters cannot escape his punishment, so the young man is drawn into sin. He does not see the danger of it all until “an arrow cleaves open his liver,” that is, until he receives a wound that can cause his death. The death may be physical in that he exposes himself to death-dealing sexually transmitted diseases.<span id="footnotesource2"></span><a href="#footnote2">*</a> The wound can also cause his spiritual death; “it involves his very soul.” His entire being and his life are seriously affected, and he has gravely sinned against God. He thus hastens into the grip of death like a bird into a trap!</p>
<p class="p25"><strong>“Do Not Wander Into Her Roadways”</strong></p>
<p class="p26">Drawing a lesson from what he has seen, the wise king urges: <em>“And now, O sons, listen to me and pay attention to the sayings of my mouth. </em><em>May your heart not turn aside to her ways. Do not wander into her roadways.</em> <em>For many are the ones she has caused to fall down slain, and all those being killed by her are numerous. The ways to Sheol her house is; they are descending to the interior rooms of death.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Proverbs 7:24-27</a>.</p>
<p class="p27">Clearly, the counsel of Solomon is to turn aside from the death-dealing ways of an immoral person and “continue living.” (<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Proverbs 7:2</a>) How timely this advice is for our day! Surely there is a need to avoid places frequented by those who are lying in wait to pick up prey. Why should you subject yourself to their tactics by going to such places? Indeed, why should you be the one “in want of heart” and wander into the roadways of a “foreigner”?</p>
<p class="p28">The “woman stranger” that the king saw enticed the young man with an invitation to “enjoy each other with love expressions.” Have not many youths<wbr />—especially girls—<wbr />been exploited in a similar way? But consider: When someone tries to draw you into sexual misconduct, is it true love or selfish lust? Why would a man who genuinely loves a woman pressure her into violating her Christian training and conscience? “May your heart not turn aside” to such ways, admonishes Solomon.</p>
<p class="p29">The words of a seducer are usually smooth and well-calculated. Keeping wisdom and understanding at our side will help us to see through them. Never forgetting what Jehovah has commanded will safeguard us. Therefore, may we always strive to ‘keep God’s commandments and continue living,’ even forever.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">1 John 2:17</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:10-12)</strong></a> Then I saw a woman meet him, Dressed like* a prostitute, with a cunning heart. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>She is loud and defiant. She never stays* at home. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>One moment she is outside, next she is in the public squares, She lurks near every corner.</p><p></p><p>Or “with the garment of.”</p><p>Lit., “Her feet never stay.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Gen. 38:14, 15)</strong></a> With that she removed her widow’s clothing and veiled herself and covered herself with a shawl and sat down at the entrance of E·naʹim, which is on the road to Timʹnah, for she saw that Sheʹlah had grown up and yet she had not been given to him as a wife. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When Judah caught sight of her, he at once took her for a prostitute, because she had covered her face.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:13-15)</strong></a> She grabs hold of him and gives him a kiss; With a bold face, she says to him: <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“I had to offer communion sacrifices. Today I paid my vows. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>That is why I came out to meet you, To look for you, and I found you!</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Lev. 19:5, 6)</strong></a> “‘Now if you offer a communion sacrifice to Jehovah, you should sacrifice it in such a way that you gain approval for yourselves. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>It should be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the next day, but what is left over until the third day should be burned in the fire.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(Lev. 22:21)</strong></a> “‘If a man presents a communion sacrifice to Jehovah to pay a vow or as a voluntary offering, it should be a sound animal from the herd or the flock, in order to gain approval. No defect at all should be in it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Num. 15:8-10)</strong></a> “‘But if you should offer a male of the herd as a burnt offering or a sacrifice to perform a special vow or communion sacrifices to Jehovah, <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>you should also present together with the male of the herd a grain offering of three tenths of an eʹphah measure of fine flour mixed with half a hin of oil. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>You should also present wine as a drink offering, half a hin, as an offering made by fire, as a pleasing* aroma to Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “appeasing; soothing.” Lit., “restful.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:16, 17)</strong></a> I have spread fine covers upon my bed, Colorful linen from Egypt. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I have sprinkled my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:18-20)</strong></a> Come, let us drink our fill of love until the morning; Let us enjoy passionate love together, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For my husband is not at home; He has gone on a distant journey. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>He took a bag of money with him, And he will not return until the day of the full moon.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:21)</strong></a> She misleads him with great persuasiveness. She seduces him with smooth speech.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Gen. 39:9)</strong></a> There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Gen. 39:12)</strong></a> Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: “Lie down with me!” But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:22, 23)</strong></a> Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “fetters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:24-27)</strong></a> And now, my sons, listen to me; Pay attention to the words I speak. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For she has caused many to fall down slain, And those she has killed are numerous. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Her house leads to the Grave;* It goes down to the inner chambers of death.</p><p></p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:2)</strong></a> Keep my commandments and live; Guard my instruction* like the pupil of your eye.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(1 John 2:17)</strong></a> Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but the one who does the will of God remains forever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote2"><p><a href="#footnotesource2">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 24</span></a> Some sexually transmitted diseases damage the liver. In advanced cases of syphilis, for example, bacterial organisms overwhelm the liver. And the organism responsible for gonorrhea can cause inflammation of the liver.</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w00 11/15 p. 29 “Keep My Commandments and Continue Living”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p8">a need to treat such instructions “like the pupil of your eyes”<wbr />—guarding them with utmost care. That is the way to avoid the deadly effect of ignoring Jehovah’s standards and thus to “continue living.”</p>
<p class="p9"><em>“Tie them </em>[<em>my commandments</em>] <em>upon your fingers,” </em>continues Solomon, <em>“and write them upon the tablet of your heart.” </em>(<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Proverbs 7:3</a>) As fingers are prominently before our eyes and are vital in carrying out our purposes, the lessons learned from a Scriptural upbringing or the gaining of Bible knowledge are to be a constant reminder and guide in everything we do. We are to inscribe them upon the tablet of our heart, making them a part of our nature.</p>
<p class="p10">Not forgetting the importance of wisdom and understanding, the king exhorts: <em>“Say to wisdom: ‘You are my sister’; and may you call understanding itself ‘Kinswoman.’” </em>(<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Proverbs 7:4</a>) Wisdom is the ability to put God-given knowledge to proper use. We should have affection for wisdom as for a dearly loved sister. What is understanding? It is the ability to see into a matter and get the sense of it by grasping the connections between its parts and the whole. Understanding must be as close to us as an intimate friend.</p>
<p class="p11">Why should we adhere to Scriptural training and cultivate closeness with wisdom and understanding? So as <em>“to guard </em>[<em>ourselves</em>] <em>against the woman stranger, against the foreigner who has made her own sayings smooth.” </em>(<span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43">Proverbs 7:5</a>) Yes, doing so will protect us from the smooth and persuasive ways of a stranger, or foreigner<wbr />—an immoral person.<span id="footnotesource3"></span><a href="#footnote3">*</a></p>
<p class="p12"><strong>The Young Man Meets ‘a Cunning Woman’</strong></p>
<p class="p13">The king of Israel next describes a scene that he himself has observed: <em>“At the window of my house, through my lattice I looked down,</em> <em>that I might peer upon the inexperienced ones. I was interested in discerning among the sons a young man in want of heart,</em> <em>passing along on the street near her corner, and in the way to her house he marches,</em> <em>in the twilight, in the evening of the day, at the approach of the night and the gloom.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Proverbs 7:6-9</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">The window through which Solomon looks out has a lattice<wbr />—apparently a framework with laths and perhaps elaborate carvings. As the twilight fades, the darkness of the night pours into the streets. He catches sight of a young man who is particularly vulnerable. Lacking discernment, or good sense, he is in want of heart. Likely, he is aware of the type of neighborhood he has entered and</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:3)</strong></a> Tie them around your fingers; Write them on the tablet of your heart.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:4)</strong></a> Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” And call understanding “my relative,”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:5)</strong></a> To guard you against the wayward* woman, Against the immoral* woman and her smooth* words.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:6-9)</strong></a> From the window of my house, Through my lattice, I looked down,  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>And as I observed the naive* ones, I discerned among the youths a young man lacking good sense.*  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He passed along the street near her corner, And he marched in the direction of her house  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>In the twilight, in the evening, At the approach of night and darkness.</p><p></p><p>Or “inexperienced.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote3"><p><a href="#footnotesource3">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 11</span></a> The word “stranger” was applied to those who alienated themselves from Jehovah by turning away from the Law. Thus, an immoral female, such as a prostitute, is referred to as a “woman stranger.”</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***w00 11/15 p. 31 “Keep My Commandments and Continue Living”***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p21">this enticing. (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">Genesis 39:9,</a><span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46"> 12</a>) Does this young man measure up?</p>
<p class="p22"><strong>‘Like a Bull to the Slaughter’</strong></p>
<p class="p23"><em>“All of a sudden he is going after her,” </em>reports Solomon, <em>“like a bull that comes even to the slaughter, and just as if fettered for the discipline of a foolish man,</em> <em>until an arrow cleaves open his liver, just as a bird hastens into the trap, and he has not known that it involves his very soul.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Proverbs 7:22, 23</a>.</p>
<p class="p24">The invitation proves to be irresistible to the young man. Throwing all good sense to the wind, he goes after her ‘like a bull to the slaughter.’ As a man in fetters cannot escape his punishment, so the young man is drawn into sin. He does not see the danger of it all until “an arrow cleaves open his liver,” that is, until he receives a wound that can cause his death. The death may be physical in that he exposes himself to death-dealing sexually transmitted diseases.<span id="footnotesource4"></span><a href="#footnote4">*</a> The wound can also cause his spiritual death; “it involves his very soul.” His entire being and his life are seriously affected, and he has gravely sinned against God. He thus hastens into the grip of death like a bird into a trap!</p>
<p class="p25"><strong>“Do Not Wander Into Her Roadways”</strong></p>
<p class="p26">Drawing a lesson from what he has seen, the wise king urges: <em>“And now, O sons, listen to me and pay attention to the sayings of my mouth. </em><em>May your heart not turn aside to her ways. Do not wander into her roadways.</em> <em>For many are the ones she has caused to fall down slain, and all those being killed by her are numerous. The ways to Sheol her house is; they are descending to the interior rooms of death.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Proverbs 7:24-27</a>.</p>
<p class="p27">Clearly, the counsel of Solomon is to turn aside from the death-dealing ways of an immoral person and “continue living.” (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Proverbs 7:2</a>) How timely this advice is for our day! Surely there is a need to avoid places frequented by those who are lying in wait to pick up prey. Why should you subject yourself to their tactics by going to such places? Indeed, why should you be the one “in want of heart” and wander into the roadways of a “foreigner”?</p>
<p class="p28">The “woman stranger” that the king saw enticed the young man with an invitation to “enjoy each other with love expressions.” Have not many youths<wbr />—especially girls—<wbr />been exploited in a similar way? But consider: When someone tries to draw you into sexual misconduct, is it true love or selfish lust? Why would a man who genuinely loves a woman pressure her into violating her Christian training and conscience? “May your heart not turn aside” to such ways, admonishes Solomon.</p>
<p class="p29">The words of a seducer are usually smooth and well-calculated. Keeping wisdom and understanding at our side will help us to see through them. Never forgetting what Jehovah has commanded will safeguard us. Therefore, may we always strive to ‘keep God’s commandments and continue living,’ even forever.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">1 John 2:17</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(Gen. 39:9)</strong></a> There is no one greater in this house than I am, and he has not withheld from me anything at all except you, because you are his wife. So how could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Gen. 39:12)</strong></a> Then she grabbed hold of him by his garment and said: “Lie down with me!” But he left his garment in her hand and fled outside.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:22, 23)</strong></a> Suddenly he goes after her, like a bull to the slaughter, Like a fool to be punished in the stocks,* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Until an arrow pierces his liver; Like a bird rushing into a trap, he does not know that it will cost him his life.*</p><p></p><p>Or “fetters.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:24-27)</strong></a> And now, my sons, listen to me; Pay attention to the words I speak. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways. Do not stray onto her paths, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For she has caused many to fall down slain, And those she has killed are numerous. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Her house leads to the Grave;* It goes down to the inner chambers of death.</p><p></p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Prov. 7:2)</strong></a> Keep my commandments and live; Guard my instruction* like the pupil of your eye.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(1 John 2:17)</strong></a> Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but the one who does the will of God remains forever.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div id="footnote4"><p><a href="#footnotesource4">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 24</span></a> Some sexually transmitted diseases damage the liver. In advanced cases of syphilis, for example, bacterial organisms overwhelm the liver. And the organism responsible for gonorrhea can cause inflammation of the liver.</p></div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w01 5/15 pp. 29-30 ‘By Wisdom Our Days Will Become Many’***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p9"><wbr />—those “in want of heart,” or those lacking understanding, as well as those lacking experience. (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Proverbs 9:4</a>) And a promise of life is held out to them. Wisdom contained in God’s Word, including that in the book of Proverbs, is certainly available to nearly everyone. Today, as the messengers of true wisdom, Jehovah’s Witnesses are busy inviting people, wherever they are found, to study the Bible. Taking in this knowledge, indeed, can lead to everlasting life.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">John 17:3</a>.</p>
<p class="p10">Christians must humbly accept wisdom’s discipline. This is particularly true of young ones and those who have recently started to learn about Jehovah. Because of limited experience in God’s ways, they may be “in want of heart.” It is not that all of their motives are bad, but it takes time and effort to bring the heart into a condition that really pleases Jehovah God. This calls for bringing thoughts, desires, affections, and goals into harmony with what God approves. How vital that they “form a longing for the unadulterated milk belonging to the word.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">1 Peter 2:2</a>.</p>
<p class="p11">In fact, should not all of us go beyond “the primary doctrine”? Surely we need to develop an interest in “the deep things of God” and draw nourishment from the solid food that belongs to mature people. (<span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54">Hebrews 5:12–6:1;</a><span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55"> 1 Corinthians 2:10</a>) “The faithful and discreet slave,” whom Jesus Christ directly supervises, diligently provides timely spiritual food for all. (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Matthew 24:45-47</a>) May we feast at wisdom’s table by diligently studying God’s Word and the Bible-based publications provided by the slave class.</p>
<p class="p12"><strong>“Do Not Reprove a Ridiculer”</strong></p>
<p class="p13">The teachings of wisdom also include correction and reproof. This feature of wisdom is not welcomed by all. Hence, the closing of the first section of the book of Proverbs contains a warning: <em>“He that is correcting the ridiculer is taking to himself dishonor, and he that is giving a reproof to someone wicked<wbr />—a defect in him. </em><em>Do not reprove a ridiculer, that he may not hate you.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57">Proverbs 9:7, 8a</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">A ridiculer builds up resentment and hatred for the one trying to help make his path straight. A wicked person lacks appreciation for the value of reproof. How unwise to try to teach the beautiful truth of God’s Word to someone who hates the truth or is simply seeking to ridicule it! When the apostle Paul was preaching in Antioch, he encountered a group of Jews who had no love for the truth. They tried to embroil him in an argument by blasphemously contradicting him, but Paul simply stated: “Since you are thrusting [the word of God] away from you and do not judge yourselves worthy of everlasting life, look! we turn to the nations.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Acts 13:45, 46</a>.</p>
<p class="p15">In our endeavor to reach honesthearted ones with the Kingdom good news, may we be careful not to get involved in debates and arguments with ridiculers. Christ Jesus instructed his disciples: “When you are entering into the house, greet the household; and if the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not deserving, let the peace from you return upon you. Wherever anyone does not take you in or listen to your words, on going out of that house or that city shake the dust off your feet.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59">Matthew 10:12-14</a>.</p>
<p class="p16">A wise person’s response to reproof is opposite to that of a ridiculer. Solomon states: <em>“Give a reproof to a wise person and he will love you. </em><em>Give to a wise person and he will become still wiser.” </em>(<span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60">Proverbs 9:8b, 9a</a>) A wise person knows that “no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but grievous; yet afterward to those who have been trained by it it yields peaceable fruit, namely, righteousness.” (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Hebrews 12:11</a>) Although the counsel may seem painful, why should we retaliate or be defensive if accepting it is going to make us wiser?</p>
<p class="p17"><em>“Impart knowledge to someone righteous and he will increase in learning,” </em>continues the wise king. (<span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62">Proverbs 9:9b</a>) No one is too wise or too old to keep learning. What a delight it is to see even those in their twilight years accept the truth and make a dedication to Jehovah! May we also endeavor to retain the will to learn and keep the mind active.</p>
<p class="p18"><strong>“To You Years of Life Will Be Added”</strong></p>
<p class="p19">Underscoring the main point of the subject under consideration, Solomon includes the essential prerequisite for wisdom. He writes: <em>“The fear of Jehovah is the start of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Most Holy One is what understanding is.” </em>(<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">Proverbs 9:10</a>) There can be no godly wisdom without profound, reverential awe for the true God. A person may have a mind well stocked with knowledge, but if he lacks the fear of Jehovah, he will fail to use that knowledge in a way that honors the Creator. He may even draw wrong conclusions from known facts, making himself look foolish. Moreover, the knowledge of Jehovah, the Most Holy One, is essential for gaining understanding, a notable characteristic of wisdom.</p>
<p class="p20">What fruitage does wisdom bear? (<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Proverbs 8:12-21,</a><span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65"> 35</a>) The king of Israel says: <em>“By me your days will become many, and to you years of life will be added.” </em>(<span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">Proverbs 9:11</a>) Length of days and years of life are the result of keeping company with wisdom. Yes, “wisdom itself preserves alive its owners.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">Ecclesiastes 7:12</a>.</p>
<p class="p21">Putting forth effort to gain wisdom is our personal responsibility. Emphasizing this fact, Solomon states: <em>“If you have become wise, you have become wise in your own behalf; and if you have ridiculed, you will bear it, just you alone.” </em>(<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Proverbs 9:12</a>) The wise one is wise to his own benefit, and the ridiculer alone is to blame for his own suffering. Indeed, we reap what we sow. May we, then, “pay attention to wisdom.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Proverbs 2:2</a>.</p>
<p class="p22"><strong>“A Woman of Stupidity Is Boisterous”</strong></p>
<p class="p23">By way of contrast, Solomon next says: <em>“A woman of stupidity is boisterous. She is simplemindedness itself and has come to know nothing whatever. And she has seated herself at the entrance of her house, upon a seat, in the high places of the town, to call out to those passing along the way, those who are going straight ahead on their paths: </em><em>‘Whoever is inexperienced, let him turn aside here.’”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">Proverbs 9:13-16a</a>.</p>
<p class="p24">Stupidity is portrayed as a loud, undisciplined, and ignorant woman. She too has built a house. And she has taken upon herself the task of calling out to whoever is inexperienced. So the passersby have a choice. Will they accept wisdom’s invitation or that of stupidity?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong>“Stolen Waters Themselves Are Sweet”</strong></p>
<p class="p26">Both wisdom and stupidity invite listeners to “turn aside here.” The appeal, however, is different. Wisdom invites people to a feast of wine, meat, and bread. The attraction that stupidity holds out reminds us of the ways of a loose woman. Solomon says: <em>“Whoever is in want of heart<wbr />—she has also said to him:</em> <em>‘Stolen waters themselves are sweet, and bread eaten in secrecy—<wbr />it is pleasant.’”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Proverbs 9:16b, 17</a>.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:4)</strong></a> “Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to the one lacking good sense:*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(John 17:3)</strong></a> This means everlasting life, their coming to know you,* the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.</p><p></p><p>Or “their taking in knowledge of you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:2)</strong></a> As newborn infants, form a longing for the unadulterated* milk of the word, so that by means of it you may grow to salvation,</p><p></p><p>Or “pure.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <strong>(Heb. 5:12-6:1)</strong></a> For although by now* you should be teachers, you again need someone to teach you from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God, and you have gone back to needing milk, not solid food. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>For everyone who continues to feed on milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness, for he is a young child. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their powers of discernment* trained to distinguish both right and wrong. </p><p><strong>6 </strong>Therefore, now that we have moved beyond the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying a foundation again, namely, repentance from dead works and faith in God,</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in view of the time.”</p><p>Or “their perceptive powers.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 2:10)</strong></a> For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong></a> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:7, 8)</strong></a> The one who corrects a ridiculer invites dishonor, And whoever reproves someone wicked will get hurt.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Acts 13:45, 46)</strong></a> When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began blasphemously contradicting the things Paul was saying. <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Then Paul and Barʹna·bas boldly said to them: “It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to you. Since you are rejecting it and do not judge yourselves worthy of everlasting life, look! we turn to the nations.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Matt. 10:12-14)</strong></a> When you enter the house, greet the household. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>If the house is deserving, let the peace you wish it come upon it; but if it is not deserving, let the peace from you return upon you. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Wherever anyone does not receive you or listen to your words, on going out of that house or that city, shake the dust off your feet.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:8, 9)</strong></a> Do not reprove a ridiculer, or he will hate you. Reprove a wise person, and he will love you.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser. Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Heb. 12:11)</strong></a> True, no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but it is painful;* yet afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.</p><p></p><p>Or “grievous.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:9)</strong></a> Share with a wise person, and he will become wiser. Teach someone righteous, and he will add to his learning.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:10)</strong></a> The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Prov. 8:12-21)</strong></a> I, wisdom, dwell together with shrewdness; I have found knowledge and thinking ability. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>The fear of Jehovah means the hating of bad. I hate self-exaltation and pride and the evil way and perverse speech. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I possess good advice and practical wisdom; Understanding and power are mine. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>By me kings keep reigning, And high officials decree righteousness. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>By me princes keep ruling, And nobles judge in righteousness. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>I love those loving me, And those seeking me will find me. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>Riches and glory are with me, Lasting wealth* and righteousness. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>My fruitage is better than gold, even refined gold, And what I produce is better than the finest silver. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>I walk in the path of righteousness, In the middle of the pathways of justice; <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>I give a rich inheritance to those who love me, And I fill up their storehouses.</p><p></p><p>Or “Hereditary values.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(Prov. 8:35)</strong></a> For the one finding me will find life, And he receives approval from Jehovah.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:11)</strong></a> For by me your days will be many, And years will be added to your life.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Eccl. 7:12)</strong></a> For wisdom is a protection just as money is a protection, but the advantage of knowledge is this: Wisdom preserves the life of its owner.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:12)</strong></a> If you become wise, you are wise to your own advantage, But if you are a ridiculer, you alone will bear it.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Prov. 2:2)</strong></a> By making your ear attentive to wisdom And inclining your heart to discernment;</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:13-16)</strong></a> A stupid woman is loud. She is ignorant and knows absolutely nothing. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>She sits at the entrance of her house On a seat in the high places of the city, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Calling out to those passing by, To those walking straight ahead on their way: <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>“Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to those lacking good sense:*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Prov. 9:16, 17)</strong></a> “Whoever is inexperienced, let him come in here.” She says to those lacking good sense:* <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“Stolen waters are sweet, And food eaten in secret is pleasant.”</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***w06 5/15 pp. 26-30 The Joys of Walking in Integrity***</strong></a></p>
<p class="qu"> 3. On what will we focus our attention in this article?</p>
<p class="p5"><sup>3 </sup>“The blessing of Jehovah<wbr />—that is what makes rich, and he adds no pain with it,” states <span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Proverbs 10:22</a>. Is not the spiritually prosperous condition of the modern-day servants of Jehovah a blessing to rejoice over? Let us consider some aspects of our spiritual prosperity and see what they mean to us personally. Taking time to reflect on the favors that Jehovah has showered upon ‘the righteous one walking in his integrity’ will indeed strengthen our resolve to continue serving our heavenly Father joyfully.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73">Proverbs 20:7</a>.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong>‘Blessings That Make Us Rich’ Now</strong></p>
<p class="qu">4, 5. Which Bible teaching do you especially appreciate, and why?</p>
<p class="p7"><sup>4 </sup><strong><em>An accurate knowledge of Bible teachings. </em></strong>The religions of Christendom generally claim to believe the Bible. However, they fail to agree on what it teaches. Even members of the same religious group often differ in their views of what the Scriptures really teach. How different their condition is from that of Jehovah’s servants! Regardless of our national, cultural, or ethnic background, we worship the God we know by name. He is not some mysterious triune god. (<span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74">Deuteronomy 6:4;</a><span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75"> Psalm 83:18;</a><span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76"> Mark 12:29</a>) We are also aware that the paramount issue of God’s universal sovereignty is due for settlement and that by maintaining our integrity to him, each one of us is personally involved in that issue. We know the truth about the dead and are free of the morbid fear of a God who is said to torment humans in hellfire or consign them to purgatory.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Ecclesiastes 9:5,</a><span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78"> 10</a>.</p>
<p class="p8"><sup>5 </sup>Moreover, what a joy it is to know that we are not an accidental product of blind evolution! Rather, we are God’s creation, made in his own image. (<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Genesis 1:26;</a><span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80"> Malachi 2:10</a>) “I shall laud you because in a fear-inspiring way I am wonderfully made,” sang the psalmist to his God. “Your works are wonderful, as my soul is very well aware.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81">Psalm 139:14</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">6, 7. What changes in your life or in the life of others you know have proved to be a blessing?</p>
<p class="p9"><sup>6 </sup><strong><em>Release from detrimental habits and practices. </em></strong>Warnings about the dangers of smoking, excessive drinking, and sexual promiscuity abound in the media. For the most part, these warnings go unheeded. What happens, though, when a sincere person learns that the true God condemns such things and is saddened by those who practice them? Why, that person is moved to exclude such practices from his life! (<span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82">Isaiah 63:10;</a><span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83"> 1 Corinthians 6:9, 10;</a><span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84"> 2 Corinthians 7:1;</a><span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85"> Ephesians 4:30</a>) While he does this primarily to please Jehovah God, he also receives additional benefits<wbr />—better health and peace of mind.</p>
<p class="p10"><sup>7 </sup>Breaking bad habits is very difficult for many. Still, each year tens of thousands are doing so. They dedicate themselves to Jehovah and submit to water baptism, thus making it public that they have eliminated from their lives the practices that displease God. What an encouragement that is to all of us! Our determination to remain free from enslavement to sinful and hurtful conduct is reinforced.</p>
<p class="qu"> 8. What Bible-based counsel contributes to family happiness?</p>
<p class="p11"><sup>8 </sup><strong><em>Happy family life. </em></strong>In numerous countries family life is faltering. Many marriages end in divorce, often leaving behind painfully scarred children. In some European countries, one-parent families make up close to 20 percent of all households. How has Jehovah helped us walk in the way of integrity in this regard? Please read <span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Ephesians 5:22–6:4</a>, and note the fine counsel that God’s Word gives to husbands, wives, and children. Applying what is stated there and elsewhere in the Scriptures certainly strengthens the marriage bond, helps parents to bring up children properly, and contributes to a happy family life. Is that not a blessing to rejoice over?</p>
<p class="qu">9, 10. How does our outlook for the future differ from that of the world?</p>
<p class="p12"><sup>9 </sup><strong><em>Assurance that world problems will soon be solved. </em></strong>Despite scientific and technological know-how and the sincere efforts of certain leaders, serious problems of present-day life remain unsolved. Klaus Schwab, founder of the World Economic Forum, recently noted that “the list of challenges facing the world grows ever longer and the time to address them grows shorter.” He spoke of “dangers that transcend national boundaries like terrorism, environmental degradation and financial instability.” Schwab concluded: “Now, more than ever, the world is faced with realities that call for collective <em>and </em>decisive action.” As the 21st century moves forward, the overall outlook for mankind’s future remains bleak.</p>
<p class="p13"><sup>10 </sup>How gratifying to know that Jehovah has instituted an arrangement that is capable of solving all of mankind’s problems<wbr />—the Messianic Kingdom of God! By means of it, the true God will ‘make wars to cease’ and bring about ‘abundant peace.’ (<span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">Psalm 46:9;</a><span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88"> 72:7</a>) The anointed King, Jesus Christ, ‘will deliver the poor one, the afflicted one, and the lowly one from oppression and from violence.’ (<span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89">Psalm 72:12-14</a>) Under Kingdom rule, there will be no food shortage. (<span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90">Psalm 72:16</a>) Jehovah “will wipe out every tear from [our] eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” (<span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91">Revelation 21:4</a>) The Kingdom has already been established in heaven and will shortly take the necessary action to affect every affair on the earth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92">Daniel 2:44;</a><span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93"> Revelation 11:15</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">11, 12. (a) Does pursuit of pleasure bring lasting happiness? Explain. (b) What brings true happiness?</p>
<p class="p14"><sup>11 </sup><strong><em>Knowing what brings true happiness. </em></strong>What does bring true happiness? One psychologist said that happiness has three components<wbr />—pleasure, engagement (involvement in such activities as work and family), and meaning (working toward a larger end or goal than self). Of the three, he listed pleasure as the least consequential and observed: “This is newsworthy because so many people build their lives around pursuing pleasure.” What is the Bible’s view in this regard?</p>
<p class="p15"><sup>12 </sup>King Solomon of ancient Israel stated: “I said, even I, in my heart: ‘Do come now, let me try you out with rejoicing. Also, see good.’ And, look! that too was vanity. I said to laughter: ‘Insanity!’ and to rejoicing: ‘What is this doing?’” (<span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94">Ecclesiastes 2:1, 2</a>) Scripturally, whatever happiness pleasure offers is at best temporary. What about involvement in work? We have the most meaningful work to get involved in<wbr />—the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. (<span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95">Matthew 24:14;</a><span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96"> 28:19, 20</a>) By sharing with others the message of salvation outlined in the Bible, we engage in a work that can result in our own salvation and in that of those who listen to us. (<span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97">1 Timothy 4:16</a>) As “God’s fellow workers,” we experience that “there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.” (<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">1 Corinthians 3:9;</a><span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99"> Acts 20:35</a>) This work adds meaning to our life and provides the Creator with an answer for his taunter, Satan the Devil. (<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Proverbs 27:11</a>) Indeed, Jehovah has shown us that godly devotion brings genuine and lasting happiness.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">1 Timothy 4:8</a>.</p>
<p class="qu">13. (a) In what way is the Theocratic Ministry School a blessing for us to rejoice over? (b) How have you benefited from the Theocratic Ministry School?</p>
<p class="p16"><sup>13 </sup><strong><em>An important and effective training program. </em></strong>Gerhard serves as an elder in a congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Recalling his youth, he says: “As a young person, I had great problems speaking. When under pressure, I could scarcely articulate and would begin to stutter. I felt inferior and developed a complex. My parents arranged for me to take a speaking course, but their efforts were to no avail. My problem was psychological, not physical. There was, though, a wonderful provision from Jehovah<wbr />—the Theocratic Ministry School. Enrolling in this school gave me renewed courage. I tried my best to practice what I learned. And it worked! I became freer, lost my complex, and became more courageous in the ministry. Now I even deliver public talks. I am truly grateful to Jehovah, who gave me a new life through this school.” Is not the way Jehovah trains us to do his work a reason to be joyful?</p>
<p class="qu">14, 15. In times of distress, what help is readily available? Illustrate.</p>
<p class="p17"><sup>14 </sup><strong><em>A personal relationship with Jehovah and support from the united international brotherhood. </em></strong>Katrin, who lives in Germany, was greatly dismayed upon hearing reports of a severe earthquake and resultant tsunami in southeast Asia. Her daughter was visiting Thailand when the catastrophe hit. For 32 hours this mother did not know whether her daughter was alive or was among the casualties that mounted hour by hour. How relieved Katrin was finally to receive a telephone call that assured her of her daughter’s safety!</p>
<p class="p18"><sup>15 </sup>What helped Katrin during those hours of anxiety? She writes: “I spent almost all of this time in prayer to Jehovah. I noticed over and over again how much strength and peace of mind this gave me. Moreover, loving spiritual brothers visited me and stood by my side.” (<span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102">Philippians 4:6, 7</a>) How much worse her situation would have been if she had had to spend those agonizing hours without the benefit of prayer to Jehovah and the comfort of a loving spiritual brotherhood! Our intimate relationship with Jehovah and his Son along with our close association with the Christian brotherhood is a unique blessing, too precious to be taken for granted.</p>
<p class="qu">16. Give an experience that illustrates the value of the resurrection hope.</p>
<p class="p19"><sup>16 </sup><strong><em>The hope of seeing dead loved ones again. </em></strong>(<span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103">John 5:28, 29</a>) A young man named Matthias was raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Unaware of his blessings, however, he drifted away from the Christian congregation when he was a teenager. He now writes: “I never really had deep discussions with my father. Over the years, we had many arguments. Still, my father always wanted the best for me. He loved me dearly, something I failed to realize at the time. In 1996, as I sat at his bedside, holding his hand and crying bitterly, I told him how sorry I was for all that I had done and that I loved him so much. But he could not hear me. After a short illness, he slipped away in death. If I live to see my father in the resurrection, we will make up for the past. And he will surely be happy to hear that I now serve as an elder and that my wife and I are privileged to serve as pioneers.” What a blessing the resurrection hope is to us!</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 10:22)</strong> It is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, And He adds no pain* with it.</p><p></p><p>Or “sorrow; hardship.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 20:7)</strong> The righteous one is walking in his integrity. Happy are his children* who come after him.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “sons.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Deut. 6:4)</strong> “Listen, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 83:18)</strong> May people know that you, whose name is Jehovah, You alone are the Most High over all the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Mark 12:29)</strong> Jesus answered: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel, Jehovah* our God is one Jehovah,*</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 9:5)</strong> For the living know* that they will die, but the dead know nothing at all, nor do they have any more reward,* because all memory of them is forgotten.</p><p></p><p>Or “are conscious.”</p><p>Or “wages.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 9:10)</strong> Whatever your hand finds to do, do with all your might, for there is no work nor planning nor knowledge nor wisdom in the Grave,* where you are going.</p><p></p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Gen. 1:26)</strong> Then God said: “Let us make man in our image, according to our likeness, and let them have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and the domestic animals and all the earth and every creeping animal that is moving on the earth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 2:10)</strong> “Do we not all have one father? Was it not one God who created us? So why do we deal treacherously with one another, profaning the covenant of our forefathers?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 139:14)</strong> I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way I am wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful, I know* this very well.</p><p></p><p>Or “My soul knows.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Isa. 63:10)</strong> But they rebelled and grieved his holy spirit. He then turned into their enemy, And he fought against them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 6:9, 10)</strong> Or do you not know that unrighteous people will not inherit God’s Kingdom? Do not be misled.* Those who are sexually immoral,* idolaters, adulterers, men who submit to homosexual acts, men who practice homosexuality,* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>thieves, greedy people, drunkards, revilers,* and extortioners will not inherit God’s Kingdom.</p><p></p><p>Or “deceived.”</p><p>See Glossary, “Sexual immorality.”</p><p>Or “men who have sex with men.” Lit., “men who lie with men.”</p><p>Or “the verbally abusive.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(2 Cor. 7:1)</strong> Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 4:30)</strong> Also, do not be grieving* God’s holy spirit, with which you have been sealed for a day of releasing by ransom.</p><p></p><p>Or “cause sorrow to.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 8</span></a> <strong>(Eph. 5:22-6:4)</strong> Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>because a husband is head of his wife just as the Christ is head of the congregation, he being a savior of this body. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>In fact, as the congregation is in subjection to the Christ, wives should also be to their husbands in everything. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Husbands, continue loving your wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and gave himself up for it, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>in order that he might sanctify it, cleansing it with the bath of water by means of the word, <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>so that he might present the congregation to himself in its splendor, without a spot or a wrinkle or any of such things, but holy and without blemish. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>In the same way husbands should love their wives as their own bodies. A man who loves his wife loves himself, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>for no man ever hated his own body,* but he feeds and cherishes it, just as the Christ does the congregation, <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>because we are members of his body. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and he will stick to* his wife, and the two will be one flesh.” <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>This sacred secret is great. Now I am speaking about Christ and the congregation. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Nevertheless, each one of you must love his wife as he does himself; on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband. </p><p><strong>6 </strong>Children, be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord, for this is righteous. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Honor your father and your mother” is the first command with a promise: <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>“That it may go well with you* and you may remain a long time on the earth.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And fathers, do not be irritating your children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and admonition* of Jehovah.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “flesh.”</p><p>Or “remain with.”</p><p>Or “That you may prosper.”</p><p>Or “instruction; guidance.” Lit., “putting mind in.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 46:9)</strong> He is bringing an end to wars throughout the earth. He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; He burns the military wagons* with fire.</p><p></p><p>Or possibly, “the shields.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:7)</strong> In his days the righteous will flourish,* And peace will abound until the moon is no more.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “sprout.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:12-14)</strong> For he will rescue the poor who cry for help, Also the lowly one and whoever has no helper. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 72:16)</strong> There will be an abundance of grain on the earth; On the top of the mountains it will overflow. His fruit will flourish as in Lebʹa·non, And in the cities people will blossom like the vegetation of the earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 21:4)</strong> And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 11:15)</strong> The seventh angel blew his trumpet. And there were loud voices in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 2:1, 2)</strong> Then I said in my heart: “Come and let me try out pleasure* and see what good comes.” But look! that too was futility.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I said about laughter, “It is madness!” And about pleasure,* “What use is it?”</p><p></p><p>Or “rejoicing.”</p><p>Or “rejoicing.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 24:14)</strong> And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 28:19, 20)</strong> Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you. And look! I am with you all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”*</p><p></p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 4:16)</strong> Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(1 Cor. 3:9)</strong> For we are God’s fellow workers. You are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Acts 20:35)</strong> I have shown you in all things that by working hard in this way, you must assist those who are weak and must keep in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said: ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 27:11)</strong> Be wise, my son, and make my heart rejoice, So that I can make a reply to him who taunts me.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 12</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 4:8)</strong> For physical training* is beneficial for a little, but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and the life that is to come.</p><p></p><p>Or “exercise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> <strong>(Phil. 4:6, 7)</strong> Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving, let your petitions be made known to God; <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your mental powers* by means of Christ Jesus.</p><p></p><p>Or “your minds; your thoughts.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 16</span></a> <strong>(John 5:28, 29)</strong> Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, and those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***bh p. 176 Baptism and Your Relationship With God***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<h2><strong>KNOWLEDGE AND FAITH NEEDED</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"> 5. (a) What is the first step in qualifying for baptism? (b) Why are Christian meetings important?</p>
<p class="p12"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>You have already begun to take the first step. How? By <em>coming to know </em>Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, perhaps by means of a systematic study of the Bible. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104"><strong>John 17:3</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>But there is more to learn. Christians want to be “filled with the accurate knowledge of [God’s] will.” (<span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105">Colossians 1:9</a>) Attending the congregation meetings of Jehovah’s Witnesses is a big help in this regard. It is important to attend such meetings. (<span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106">Hebrews 10:24, 25</a>) Regular meeting attendance will help you come to know God.</p>
<p class="qu"> 6. How much Bible knowledge must you have in order to qualify for baptism?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Of course, you do not need to know everything in the Bible in order to qualify for baptism. The Ethiopian court official had <em>some </em>knowledge, but he needed help to understand certain parts of the Scriptures. (<span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107">Acts 8:30, 31</a>) Likewise, you still have much to learn. In fact, you will never stop learning about God. (<span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108">Ecclesiastes 3:11</a>) Before you can get baptized, however, you need to know and accept at least the basic Bible teachings. (<span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109">Hebrews 5:12</a>) Such teachings include the truth about the condition of the dead and the importance of God’s name and his Kingdom.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(John 17:3)</strong> This means everlasting life, their coming to know you,* the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.</p><p></p><p>Or “their taking in knowledge of you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Col. 1:9)</strong> That is also why from the day we heard of it, we have never stopped praying for you and asking that you may be filled with the accurate knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Acts 8:30, 31)</strong> Philip ran alongside and heard him reading aloud Isaiah the prophet, and he said: “Do you actually know* what you are reading?” <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>He said: “Really, how could I ever do so unless someone guided me?” So he urged Philip to get on and sit down with him.</p><p></p><p>Or “understand.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Eccl. 3:11)</strong> He has made everything beautiful* in its time. He has even put eternity in their heart; yet mankind will never find out the work that the true God has made from start to finish.</p><p></p><p>Or “well-arranged; proper; appropriate.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 6</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 5:12)</strong> For although by now* you should be teachers, you again need someone to teach you from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God, and you have gone back to needing milk, not solid food.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in view of the time.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***sn song 83 We Need Self-Control***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 83</p>
<h1><strong>We Need Self-Control</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110">Romans 7:14-25</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. We love Jehovah with heart, mind, and soul;</p>
<p class="p5">But since we are sinful, we need self-control.</p>
<p class="p6">Minding the flesh brings trouble and strife.</p>
<p class="p7">Minding the spirit means peace and life.</p>
<p class="p8">2. Satan’s temptations confront us each day,</p>
<p class="p9">And sin’s law within us can lead us astray.</p>
<p class="p10">Power of truth is greater than sin.</p>
<p class="p11">Thanks to Jehovah, our minds can win.</p>
<p class="p12">3. Each word and action reflects on God’s name,</p>
<p class="p13">So we must endeavor to keep free from blame.</p>
<p class="p14">In all we do, we make this our goal:</p>
<p class="p15">Always maintaining our self-control.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p16">(See also <span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111">1 Cor. 9:25;</a><span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112"> Gal. 5:23;</a><span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113"> 2 Pet. 1:6</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <strong>(Rom. 7:14-25)</strong></a> For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>For I do not understand what I am doing. For I do not practice what I wish, but I do what I hate. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>However, if I do what I do not wish, I agree that the Law is fine. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>But now I am no longer the one doing it, but it is the sin that resides in me. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells nothing good; for I have the desire to do what is fine but not the ability to carry it out. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>For I do not do the good that I wish, but the bad that I do not wish is what I practice. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>If, then, I do what I do not wish, I am no longer the one carrying it out, but it is the sin dwelling in me. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>I find, then, this law in my case: When I wish to do what is right, what is bad is present with me. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I really delight in the law of God according to the man I am within, <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>but I see in my body* another law warring against the law of my mind and leading me captive to sin’s law that is in my body.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Miserable man that I am! Who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death? <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So, then, with my mind I myself am a slave to God’s law, but with my flesh to sin’s law.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “members.”</p><p>Lit., “members.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <strong>(1 Cor. 9:25)</strong></a> Now everyone competing in a contest* exercises self-control in all things. Of course, they do it to receive a crown that can perish, but we, one that does not perish.</p><p></p><p>Or “every athlete.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <strong>(Gal. 5:23)</strong></a> mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <strong>(2 Pet. 1:6)</strong></a> to your knowledge self-control, to your self-control endurance, to your endurance godly devotion,</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***kr pp. 16-19 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>13, 14. </strong>(a) How did the “messenger” help to prepare the way for the Messianic King? (b) What can we learn from our brothers of more than a century ago?</p>
<p class="p19"><strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Consider this: Would people have been prepared for the beginning of Christ’s presence if they were not able to distinguish Jesus from his Father, Jehovah? Surely not! Nor would they have been prepared if they thought that immortality was the automatic possession of all and not a precious gift bestowed on only relatively few of Christ’s footstep followers; nor if they thought that God tormented people in hellfire for all eternity with no hope of relief! Without doubt, the “messenger” prepared the way for the Messianic King!</p>
<p class="p20"><strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And what about us today? What can we learn from our brothers of more than a century ago? We likewise need to be avid readers and students of God’s Word. (<span id="citationsource114"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation114">John 17:3</a>) As this materialistic world becomes emaciated, spiritually speaking, may our appetite for spiritual food grow ever stronger!<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource115"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation115"><strong>1 Timothy 4:15</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
<h2><strong>“Get Out of Her, My People”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>15. </strong>The Bible Students gradually came to what realization? (See also footnote.)</p>
<p class="p22"><strong><sup>15 </sup>The Bible Students taught that it was necessary to break away from worldly churches. </strong>In 1879, the <em>Watch Tower </em>referred to the “Babylon church.” Was it talking about the papacy? The Roman Catholic Church? Protestant denominations had for centuries made such applications of Babylon as a prophetic type in Scripture. However, the Bible Students gradually came to the realization that <em>all </em>the churches of Christendom were included in modern-day “Babylon.” Why? Because they all taught doctrinal lies such as those discussed above.<span id="footnotesource5"></span><a href="#footnote5">*</a> In time, our publications became more and more direct about what honesthearted members of Babylon’s churches should do.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>16, 17. </strong>(a) How did Volume III of <em>Millennial Dawn </em>and the <em>Watch Tower </em>urge people to remove themselves from false religion? (b) What factor diluted such early warnings? (See footnote.)</p>
<p class="p23"><strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For example, in 1891, Volume III of <em>Millennial Dawn </em>discussed God’s rejection of modern-day Babylon and noted: “The whole system<wbr />—a system of systems—<wbr />is rejected.” It added that all those “not in sympathy with her false doctrines and practices are now called to separate themselves from her.”</p>
<p class="p24"><strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>In January 1900, the <em>Watch Tower </em>offered counsel to those who still kept their names on the denominational rolls of Christendom’s churches and who rationalized their course, saying, “My sympathies are all with the truth, and I rarely attend other meetings.” The article asked: “But is this right<wbr />—to be half out and half in Babylon? Is this the obedience required . . . and pleasing and acceptable to God? Surely not. He [the church member] publicly entered into a <em>covenant </em>with the denomination when he joined it, and he should faithfully live up to all the conditions of that covenant until he . . . <em>publicly </em>renounces or cancels his membership.” Over the years, that message became stronger.<span id="footnotesource6"></span><a href="#footnote6">*</a> Servants of Jehovah must renounce all ties with false religion.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>18. </strong>Why was it necessary for people to get out of Babylon the Great?</p>
<p class="p25"><strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>If such warnings to get out of Babylon the Great had not been sounded regularly, would Christ as the newly installed King have had a body of prepared, anointed servants on earth? Surely not, for only Christians who are free from Babylon’s grip can worship Jehovah “with spirit and truth.” (<span id="citationsource116"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation116">John 4:24</a>) Are we today likewise determined to keep free from false religion? Let us keep obeying the command: “Get out of her, my people”!<wbr />—<strong>Read </strong><span id="citationsource117"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation117"><strong>Revelation 18:4</strong></a><strong>.</strong></p>
<h2><strong>Gathering for Worship</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>19, 20. </strong>How did the <em>Watch Tower </em>encourage God’s people to gather together for worship?</p>
<p class="p27"><strong><sup>19 </sup>The Bible Students taught that fellow believers should gather together for worship, where that was possible. </strong>For genuine Christians, it is not enough to get out of false religion. It is vital to take part in pure worship as well. From its early issues, the <em>Watch Tower </em>encouraged readers to gather together for worship. For example, in July 1880, Brother Russell reported on a speaking tour he had made, commenting on how encouraging the many meetings had been. He then urged readers to send in cards regarding their progress<wbr />—some of which would be published in the journal’s pages. To what end? “Let us all know . . . how the Lord prospers you; whether you keep up your meetings with those of like precious faith.”</p>
<p class="p28"><strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>In 1882, an article called “Assembling Together” appeared in the <em>Watch Tower. </em>The article exhorted Christians to hold meetings “for mutual edification, encouragement and strengthening.” It noted: “It matters not whether there is any one learned or talented among you. Let each one bring his own Bible, paper, and pencil, and avail yourselves of as many helps in the way of a Concordance, . . . as possible. Choose your subject; ask for the Spirit’s guidance in the understanding of it; then read, <em>think, </em>compare scripture with scripture and you will assuredly be guided into truth.”</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>21. </strong>The congregation in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, set what example regarding meetings and shepherding?</p>
<p class="p29"><strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>The Bible Students had their headquarters in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, U.S.A. There they set a fine example by gathering together in obedience to the inspired counsel recorded at <span id="citationsource118"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation118"><strong>Hebrews 10:24, 25</strong></a><strong>. (Read.) </strong>Much later, an elderly brother named Charles Capen recalled attending those meetings as a boy. He wrote: “I still remember one of the scripture texts painted on the wall of the Society’s assembly hall. ‘One is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren.’ That text has always stood out in my mind<wbr />—there is no clergy-laity distinction among Jehovah’s people.” (<span id="citationsource119"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation119">Matt. 23:8</a>) Brother Capen also recalled the stimulating meetings, the warm encouragement, and Brother Russell’s diligent efforts to shepherd every member of the congregation personally.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>22. </strong>How did faithful people respond to the encouragement to attend Christian meetings, and what lesson may we learn from them?</p>
<p class="p30"><strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Faithful people responded to this example and to the instruction given. Congregations formed in other states, such as Ohio and Michigan, and then all over North America and in other lands. Consider: Would faithful people have truly been prepared for the presence of Christ if they had not been trained to obey the inspired counsel to meet together for worship? Surely not! What about us today? We need to be just as determined to attend Christian meetings faithfully, seeking every opportunity to worship together and be spiritually upbuilding to one another.</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation114"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource114">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(John 17:3)</strong> This means everlasting life, their coming to know you,* the only true God, and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.</p><p></p><p>Or “their taking in knowledge of you.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation115"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource115">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 14</span></a> <strong>(1 Tim. 4:15)</strong> Ponder over* these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.</p><p></p><p>Or “Meditate on.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation116"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource116">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(John 4:24)</strong> God is a Spirit, and those worshipping him must worship with spirit and truth.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation117"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource117">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 18</span></a> <strong>(Rev. 18:4)</strong> And I heard another voice out of heaven say: “Get out of her, my people, if you do not want to share with her in her sins, and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation118"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource118">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Heb. 10:24, 25)</strong> And let us consider* one another so as to incite* to love and fine works, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>not forsaking our meeting together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as you see the day drawing near.</p><p></p><p>Or “be concerned about; pay attention to.”</p><p>Or “motivate; stir up.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation119"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource119">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 21</span></a> <strong>(Matt. 23:8)</strong> But you, do not you be called Rabbi, for one is your Teacher, and all of you are brothers.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote5"><p><a href="#footnotesource5">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 15</span></a> Although the Bible Students saw the need to withdraw from religious organizations that were friends of the world, for years they continued to view as Christian brothers individuals who, although not Bible Students, professed belief in the ransom and claimed to be dedicated to God.</p></div>
<div id="footnote6"><p><a href="#footnotesource6">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 17</span></a> One factor that diluted the force of such early warnings was that they were applied mainly to Christ’s little flock of 144,000. We will see in Chapter 5 that prior to 1935, it was thought that the “great multitude,” as described at <span id="citationsource120"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation120">Revelation 7:9, 10</a> in the <em>King James Version, </em>would include countless members of the churches of Christendom and that they would be made a secondary heavenly class as a reward for siding with Christ at the very end.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation120"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource120">^ <strong>(Rev. 7:9, 10)</strong></a> After this I saw, and look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues,* standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes; and there were palm branches in their hands. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>And they keep shouting with a loud voice, saying: “Salvation we owe to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.”</p><p></p><p>Or “languages.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016365.xhtml#pcitationsource12">^ <span id="pcitation12"></span><strong>***snnw song 152 Our Strength, Our Hope, Our Confidence***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 152</p>
<h1><strong>Our Strength, Our Hope, Our Confidence</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource121"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation121">Proverbs 14:26</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             O Jehovah, you have given us</p>
<p class="p8">a hope that we hold dear.</p>
<p class="p9">It’s a hope we find so thrilling</p>
<p class="p10">we want the world to hear.</p>
<p class="p11">But at times this life’s anxieties</p>
<p class="p12">are the cause of fears within,</p>
<p class="p13">And the hope that burned so brightly</p>
<p class="p14">has suddenly grown dim.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p15">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p16">You’re our strength, you’re our hope,</p>
<p class="p17">you’re our confidence.</p>
<p class="p18">Whatever we lack, you supply.</p>
<p class="p19">When we preach, when we teach,</p>
<p class="p20">we have confidence</p>
<p class="p21">because it’s on you we rely.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p22">             So Jehovah, please instill in us</p>
<p class="p23">a heart that won’t forget,</p>
<p class="p24">For you’ve always been our comfort</p>
<p class="p25">when troubled times we’ve met.</p>
<p class="p26">And these thoughts that lift and strengthen us</p>
<p class="p27">can revive that dying flame,</p>
<p class="p28">For they fill our hearts with courage</p>
<p class="p29">to speak about your name.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p30">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p31">You’re our strength, you’re our hope,</p>
<p class="p32">you’re our confidence.</p>
<p class="p33">Whatever we lack, you supply.</p>
<p class="p34">When we preach, when we teach,</p>
<p class="p35">we have confidence</p>
<p class="p36">because it’s on you we rely.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p37">(See also <span id="citationsource122"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation122">Ps. 72:13, 14;</a><span id="citationsource123"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation123"> Prov. 3:5, 6,</a><span id="citationsource124"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation124"> 26;</a><span id="citationsource125"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation125"> Jer. 17:7</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation121"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource121">^ <strong>(Prov. 14:26)</strong></a> There is strong confidence in the fear of Jehovah, And it will be a refuge for his children.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation122"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource122">^ <strong>(Ps. 72:13, 14)</strong></a> He will have pity on the lowly and the poor, And the lives* of the poor he will save. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From oppression and from violence he will rescue them,* And their blood will be precious in his eyes.</p><p></p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “redeem their souls.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation123"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource123">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong></a> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation124"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource124">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:26)</strong></a> For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation125"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource125">^ <strong>(Jer. 17:7)</strong></a> Blessed is the man* who puts his trust in Jehovah, Whose confidence is in Jehovah.</p><p></p><p>Or “strong man.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
