<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 “Trust in Jehovah With All Your Heart”</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016364.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 1:1-6:35)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>The proverbs of Solʹo·mon, the son of David, the king of Israel:  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>To learn* wisdom and discipline; To understand wise sayings;  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>To acquire the discipline that gives insight, Righteousness, good judgment,* and uprightness;*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To impart shrewdness to the inexperienced; To give a young man knowledge and thinking ability.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A wise person listens and takes in more instruction; A man of understanding acquires skillful direction*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>To understand a proverb and a puzzling saying,* The words of the wise and their riddles.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The fear of* Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They are an attractive wreath for your head And a fine ornament for your neck. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>My son, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If they say: “Come with us. Let us set an ambush to shed blood. We will lie hidden, waiting for innocent victims without cause. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>We will swallow them alive as the Grave* does, Whole, like those going down to the pit. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Let us seize all their precious treasures; We will fill our houses with spoil. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You should join us,* And we will all share equally what we steal.”* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My son, do not follow them. Keep your feet off their path, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For their feet run to do evil; They hurry to shed blood. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>It is surely in vain to spread a net in full sight of a bird. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>That is why these lie in ambush to shed blood; They lie hidden to take the lives* of others. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>These are the ways of those seeking dishonest profit, Which will take away the life* of those who obtain it. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>True wisdom cries aloud in the street. It keeps raising its voice in the public squares. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>At the corner* of the busy streets it calls out. At the entrances of the city gates it says: <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>“How long will you inexperienced ones love inexperience? How long will you ridiculers take pleasure in ridicule? And how long will you foolish ones hate knowledge? <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Respond to my reproof.* Then I will pour out my spirit for you; I will make my words known to you. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Because I called out, but you kept refusing, I stretched out my hand, but no one was paying attention, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You kept neglecting all my advice And rejecting my reproof, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I also will laugh when disaster strikes you; I will mock when what you dread comes, <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When what you dread comes like a storm, And your disaster arrives like a storm wind, When distress and trouble come upon you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer; They will eagerly look for me, but they will not find me, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Because they hated knowledge, And they did not choose to fear Jehovah. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>They refused my advice; They disrespected all my reproof. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>So they will bear the consequences* of their way, And they will be glutted with their own counsel.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For the waywardness of the inexperienced will kill them, And the complacency of fools will destroy them. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>But the one listening to me will dwell in security And be undisturbed by the dread of calamity.” </p><p><strong>2 </strong>My son, if you accept my sayings And treasure up my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>By making your ear attentive to wisdom And inclining your heart to discernment;  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Moreover, if you call out for understanding And raise your voice for discernment;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>If you keep seeking for it as for silver, And you keep searching for it as for hidden treasures;  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah, And you will find the knowledge of God.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For Jehovah himself gives wisdom; From his mouth come knowledge and discernment.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He treasures up practical wisdom for the upright; He is a shield for those walking in integrity.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He watches over the paths of justice, And he will guard the way of his loyal ones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then you will understand what is righteous and just and fair, The entire course of what is good. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>When wisdom enters your heart And knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Thinking ability will keep watch over you, And discernment will safeguard you, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To save you from the bad course, From the man speaking perverse things, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>From those leaving the upright paths To walk in the ways of darkness, <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From those who rejoice in wrongdoing, Who find joy in the perverseness of evil, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Those whose paths are crooked And whose entire course is devious. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>It will save you from the wayward* woman, From the smooth* words of the immoral* woman, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Who abandons the close companion* of her youth And forgets the covenant of her God; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For her house sinks down into death, And her paths* lead to those powerless in death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>None of those having relations with* her will return, Nor will they regain the pathways of life. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So follow the way of good people And stay on the paths of the righteous, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>For only the upright will reside in the earth, And the blameless* will remain in it. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth, And the treacherous will be torn away from it. </p><p><strong>3 </strong>My son, do not forget my teaching,* And may your heart observe my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not let loyal love and faithfulness* leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then your storehouses will be completely filled, And your vats* will overflow with new wine. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, And do not loathe his reproof, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, Just as a father does a son in whom he delights. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who finds wisdom And the man who acquires discernment; <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>To gain it is better than gaining silver, And having it as profit is better than having gold. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is more precious than corals;* Nothing you desire can compare to it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Long life is in its right hand; Riches and glory are in its left hand. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Its ways are pleasant, And all its paths are peaceful. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart And the cloudy skies dripped with dew. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, do not lose sight of them.* Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability; <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>They will give you* life And be an adornment for your neck; <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then you will walk on your way in safety, And your foot will never stumble.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When you lie down, you will have no fear; You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You will not fear any sudden terror Nor the storm that is coming on the wicked. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it* If it is within your power* to help. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not plot harm against your neighbor When he lives in a sense of security with you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Do not quarrel with a man for no reason If he has done nothing bad to you. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not envy the violent man Nor choose any of his ways, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For Jehovah detests a devious person, But His close friendship is with the upright. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one, But he blesses the home of the righteous. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The wise will inherit honor, But the stupid ones glorify dishonor. </p><p><strong>4 </strong>Listen, my sons, to the discipline of a father; Pay attention in order to gain understanding,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For I will give you good instruction; Do not forsake my teaching.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I was a true son to my father And the one especially loved by my mother.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He taught me and said: “May your heart hold fast to my words. Keep my commandments and continue living.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding. Do not forget, and do not turn aside from what I say.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not forsake it, and it will protect you. Love it, and it will safeguard you.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Wisdom is the most important* thing, so acquire wisdom, And with all you acquire, acquire understanding.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you. It will honor you because you embrace it.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>It will place an attractive wreath on your head; It will adorn you with a crown of beauty.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Listen, my son, and accept my sayings, And the years of your life will be many. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I will instruct you in the way of wisdom; I will lead you in the tracks of uprightness. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>When you walk, your steps will not be hindered; And if you run, you will not stumble. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Hold on to discipline; do not let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Do not enter the path of the wicked, And do not walk in the way of evil men. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Shun it, do not take it; Turn away from it, and pass it by. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For they cannot sleep unless they do what is bad. They are robbed of sleep unless they cause someone’s downfall. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>They feed themselves with the bread of wickedness, And they drink the wine of violence. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light That grows brighter and brighter until full daylight. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The way of the wicked is like the darkness; They do not know what makes them stumble. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>My son, pay attention to my words; Listen carefully* to my sayings. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do not lose sight of them; Keep them deep within your heart, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For they are life to those who find them And health to their whole body.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart, For out of it are the sources of life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Put crooked speech away from you, And keep devious talk far away from you. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Your eyes should look straight ahead, Yes, fix your gaze* straight ahead of you. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Smooth out* the course of your feet, And all your ways will be sure. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not incline to the right or the left. Turn your feet away from what is bad. </p><p><strong>5 </strong>My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Listen carefully* to my discernment,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So that you may guard your thinking abilities And safeguard knowledge with your lips.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the lips of a wayward* woman drip like a honeycomb, And her mouth is smoother than oil.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But in the end she is as bitter as wormwood And as sharp as a two-edged sword.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Her feet descend into death. Her steps lead straight to the Grave.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>She gives no thought to the path of life. Her course wanders, but she does not know where.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Now, my sons, listen to me And do not turn away from what I am saying.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Stay far away from her; Do not go near the entrance of her house,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So that you may not give your dignity to others Nor reap years of what is cruel; <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So that strangers may not drain your resources* And what you labored for go to the house of a foreigner. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Otherwise, you will groan at the end of your life When your flesh and body waste away <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And you say: “How I hated discipline! How my heart despised reproof! <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I did not listen to the voice of my instructors Or pay attention to my teachers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I have come to the brink of complete ruin In the midst of the entire congregation.”* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Drink water from your own cistern And flowing* water from your own well. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Should your springs be dispersed outside, Your streams of water in the public squares? <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let them be for you alone, And not for strangers with you. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May your own fountain* be blessed, And may you rejoice with the wife of your youth, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat.* Let her breasts satisfy* you at all times. May you be captivated by her love constantly. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So why, my son, should you be captivated by a wayward* woman Or embrace the bosom of an immoral* woman? <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah; He examines all his paths. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The wicked one is ensnared by his own errors, And he will be caught in the ropes of his own sin. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He will die for lack of discipline And go astray because of his excessive foolishness. </p><p><strong>6 </strong>My son, if you have put up security* for your neighbor, If you have given your handshake* to a stranger,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>If you have been ensnared by your promise, Caught by the words of your mouth,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do this, my son, and free yourself, For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not allow your eyes to sleep, Nor your eyelids to slumber.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand, Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Go to the ant, you lazy one; Observe its ways and become wise.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It prepares its food in the summer, And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech; <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With a perverted heart, He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly; In a moment he will be broken beyond healing. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There are six things that Jehovah hates; Yes, seven things that he* detests: <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A false witness who lies with every breath, And anyone sowing contentions among brothers. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Observe, my son, the commandment of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Always bind them around your heart; Tie them about your neck. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When you walk about, it will lead you; When you lie down, it will stand guard over you; And when you awaken, it will speak to you.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For the commandment is a lamp, And the law is a light, And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They will guard you against the bad woman, Against the seductive tongue of the immoral* woman. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not desire her beauty in your heart Or allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread, But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet? <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife; No one who touches her will go unpunished. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>People do not despise a thief If he steals to satisfy himself* when he is hungry. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold; He will give up all the valuables of his house. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;* The one who does so brings ruin on himself.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He will get only wounds and dishonor, And his disgrace will not be wiped away. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For jealousy makes a husband furious; He will show no compassion when he takes revenge. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He will accept no compensation;* He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “To know.”</p><p>Or “what is just.”</p><p>Or “fairness.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “a parable.”</p><p>Or “reverence for.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Throw in your lot with us.”</p><p>Or “share a common bag (purse).”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “head.”</p><p>Or “Turn back when I reprove.”</p><p>Lit., “eat from the fruit.”</p><p>Or “schemes; plans.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “strange.” Evidently, one morally estranged from God.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” Evidently, one morally alienated from God.</p><p>Or “the husband.”</p><p>Lit., “tracks.”</p><p>Lit., “going in to.”</p><p>Or “the one who keeps integrity.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “truth.”</p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “winepresses.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Evidently referring to God’s qualities mentioned in the previous verses.</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “strike against anything.”</p><p>Or “to whom it is owing.”</p><p>Or “within the power of your hand.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “the prime.”</p><p>Lit., “Incline your ear.”</p><p>Lit., “to all their flesh.”</p><p>Or “beaming eyes.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Carefully consider.”</p><p>Lit., “Incline your ear.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Lit., “In the midst of the assembly and the congregation.”</p><p>Or “fresh.”</p><p>Or “water source.”</p><p>Or “ibex.”</p><p>Or “intoxicate.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “gone surety.”</p><p>That is, in a pledge.</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “instruct you.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “fill his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “ransom.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016364.xhtml#citationsource2">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:1-35)</strong></a> <span id="citation2"></span>My son, do not forget my teaching,* And may your heart observe my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not let loyal love and faithfulness* leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then your storehouses will be completely filled, And your vats* will overflow with new wine. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, And do not loathe his reproof, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, Just as a father does a son in whom he delights. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who finds wisdom And the man who acquires discernment; <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>To gain it is better than gaining silver, And having it as profit is better than having gold. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is more precious than corals;* Nothing you desire can compare to it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Long life is in its right hand; Riches and glory are in its left hand. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Its ways are pleasant, And all its paths are peaceful. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart And the cloudy skies dripped with dew. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, do not lose sight of them.* Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability; <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>They will give you* life And be an adornment for your neck; <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then you will walk on your way in safety, And your foot will never stumble.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When you lie down, you will have no fear; You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You will not fear any sudden terror Nor the storm that is coming on the wicked. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it* If it is within your power* to help. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not plot harm against your neighbor When he lives in a sense of security with you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Do not quarrel with a man for no reason If he has done nothing bad to you. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not envy the violent man Nor choose any of his ways, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For Jehovah detests a devious person, But His close friendship is with the upright. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one, But he blesses the home of the righteous. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The wise will inherit honor, But the stupid ones glorify dishonor.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “truth.”</p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “winepresses.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Evidently referring to God’s qualities mentioned in the previous verses.</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “strike against anything.”</p><p>Or “to whom it is owing.”</p><p>Or “within the power of your hand.”</p></div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
