<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>
<html dir="ltr" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Extracted Text: 10/16 October 3-9</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/extracted.css" type="text/css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/fonts.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body class="meps-lang-E meps-script-ROMAN"><div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016363.xhtml#citationsource1">^ <strong>(Prov. 1:1-6:35)</strong></a> <span id="citation1"></span>The proverbs of Solʹo·mon, the son of David, the king of Israel:  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>To learn* wisdom and discipline; To understand wise sayings;  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>To acquire the discipline that gives insight, Righteousness, good judgment,* and uprightness;*  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>To impart shrewdness to the inexperienced; To give a young man knowledge and thinking ability.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>A wise person listens and takes in more instruction; A man of understanding acquires skillful direction*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>To understand a proverb and a puzzling saying,* The words of the wise and their riddles.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>The fear of* Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Listen, my son, to the discipline of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>They are an attractive wreath for your head And a fine ornament for your neck. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>My son, if sinners try to entice you, do not consent. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>If they say: “Come with us. Let us set an ambush to shed blood. We will lie hidden, waiting for innocent victims without cause. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>We will swallow them alive as the Grave* does, Whole, like those going down to the pit. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Let us seize all their precious treasures; We will fill our houses with spoil. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>You should join us,* And we will all share equally what we steal.”* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>My son, do not follow them. Keep your feet off their path, <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For their feet run to do evil; They hurry to shed blood. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>It is surely in vain to spread a net in full sight of a bird. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>That is why these lie in ambush to shed blood; They lie hidden to take the lives* of others. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>These are the ways of those seeking dishonest profit, Which will take away the life* of those who obtain it. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>True wisdom cries aloud in the street. It keeps raising its voice in the public squares. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>At the corner* of the busy streets it calls out. At the entrances of the city gates it says: <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>“How long will you inexperienced ones love inexperience? How long will you ridiculers take pleasure in ridicule? And how long will you foolish ones hate knowledge? <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Respond to my reproof.* Then I will pour out my spirit for you; I will make my words known to you. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Because I called out, but you kept refusing, I stretched out my hand, but no one was paying attention, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You kept neglecting all my advice And rejecting my reproof, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I also will laugh when disaster strikes you; I will mock when what you dread comes, <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When what you dread comes like a storm, And your disaster arrives like a storm wind, When distress and trouble come upon you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer; They will eagerly look for me, but they will not find me, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Because they hated knowledge, And they did not choose to fear Jehovah. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>They refused my advice; They disrespected all my reproof. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>So they will bear the consequences* of their way, And they will be glutted with their own counsel.* <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For the waywardness of the inexperienced will kill them, And the complacency of fools will destroy them. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>But the one listening to me will dwell in security And be undisturbed by the dread of calamity.” </p><p><strong>2 </strong>My son, if you accept my sayings And treasure up my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>By making your ear attentive to wisdom And inclining your heart to discernment;  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Moreover, if you call out for understanding And raise your voice for discernment;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>If you keep seeking for it as for silver, And you keep searching for it as for hidden treasures;  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Then you will understand the fear of Jehovah, And you will find the knowledge of God.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>For Jehovah himself gives wisdom; From his mouth come knowledge and discernment.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>He treasures up practical wisdom for the upright; He is a shield for those walking in integrity.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>He watches over the paths of justice, And he will guard the way of his loyal ones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Then you will understand what is righteous and just and fair, The entire course of what is good. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>When wisdom enters your heart And knowledge becomes pleasant to your soul,* <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Thinking ability will keep watch over you, And discernment will safeguard you, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>To save you from the bad course, From the man speaking perverse things, <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>From those leaving the upright paths To walk in the ways of darkness, <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>From those who rejoice in wrongdoing, Who find joy in the perverseness of evil, <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Those whose paths are crooked And whose entire course is devious. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>It will save you from the wayward* woman, From the smooth* words of the immoral* woman, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Who abandons the close companion* of her youth And forgets the covenant of her God; <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>For her house sinks down into death, And her paths* lead to those powerless in death. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>None of those having relations with* her will return, Nor will they regain the pathways of life. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So follow the way of good people And stay on the paths of the righteous, <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>For only the upright will reside in the earth, And the blameless* will remain in it. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth, And the treacherous will be torn away from it. </p><p><strong>3 </strong>My son, do not forget my teaching,* And may your heart observe my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not let loyal love and faithfulness* leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then your storehouses will be completely filled, And your vats* will overflow with new wine. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, And do not loathe his reproof, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, Just as a father does a son in whom he delights. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who finds wisdom And the man who acquires discernment; <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>To gain it is better than gaining silver, And having it as profit is better than having gold. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is more precious than corals;* Nothing you desire can compare to it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Long life is in its right hand; Riches and glory are in its left hand. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Its ways are pleasant, And all its paths are peaceful. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart And the cloudy skies dripped with dew. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, do not lose sight of them.* Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability; <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>They will give you* life And be an adornment for your neck; <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then you will walk on your way in safety, And your foot will never stumble.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When you lie down, you will have no fear; You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You will not fear any sudden terror Nor the storm that is coming on the wicked. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it* If it is within your power* to help. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not plot harm against your neighbor When he lives in a sense of security with you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Do not quarrel with a man for no reason If he has done nothing bad to you. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not envy the violent man Nor choose any of his ways, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For Jehovah detests a devious person, But His close friendship is with the upright. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one, But he blesses the home of the righteous. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The wise will inherit honor, But the stupid ones glorify dishonor. </p><p><strong>4 </strong>Listen, my sons, to the discipline of a father; Pay attention in order to gain understanding,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>For I will give you good instruction; Do not forsake my teaching.*  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I was a true son to my father And the one especially loved by my mother.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He taught me and said: “May your heart hold fast to my words. Keep my commandments and continue living.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Acquire wisdom, acquire understanding. Do not forget, and do not turn aside from what I say.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Do not forsake it, and it will protect you. Love it, and it will safeguard you.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Wisdom is the most important* thing, so acquire wisdom, And with all you acquire, acquire understanding.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Highly esteem it, and it will exalt you. It will honor you because you embrace it.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>It will place an attractive wreath on your head; It will adorn you with a crown of beauty.” <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Listen, my son, and accept my sayings, And the years of your life will be many. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>I will instruct you in the way of wisdom; I will lead you in the tracks of uprightness. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>When you walk, your steps will not be hindered; And if you run, you will not stumble. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Hold on to discipline; do not let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>Do not enter the path of the wicked, And do not walk in the way of evil men. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Shun it, do not take it; Turn away from it, and pass it by. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>For they cannot sleep unless they do what is bad. They are robbed of sleep unless they cause someone’s downfall. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>They feed themselves with the bread of wickedness, And they drink the wine of violence. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light That grows brighter and brighter until full daylight. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>The way of the wicked is like the darkness; They do not know what makes them stumble. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>My son, pay attention to my words; Listen carefully* to my sayings. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Do not lose sight of them; Keep them deep within your heart, <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>For they are life to those who find them And health to their whole body.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Above all the things that you guard, safeguard your heart, For out of it are the sources of life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>Put crooked speech away from you, And keep devious talk far away from you. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Your eyes should look straight ahead, Yes, fix your gaze* straight ahead of you. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Smooth out* the course of your feet, And all your ways will be sure. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not incline to the right or the left. Turn your feet away from what is bad. </p><p><strong>5 </strong>My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Listen carefully* to my discernment,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>So that you may guard your thinking abilities And safeguard knowledge with your lips.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the lips of a wayward* woman drip like a honeycomb, And her mouth is smoother than oil.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>But in the end she is as bitter as wormwood And as sharp as a two-edged sword.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Her feet descend into death. Her steps lead straight to the Grave.*  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>She gives no thought to the path of life. Her course wanders, but she does not know where.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Now, my sons, listen to me And do not turn away from what I am saying.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>Stay far away from her; Do not go near the entrance of her house,  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>So that you may not give your dignity to others Nor reap years of what is cruel; <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>So that strangers may not drain your resources* And what you labored for go to the house of a foreigner. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Otherwise, you will groan at the end of your life When your flesh and body waste away <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And you say: “How I hated discipline! How my heart despised reproof! <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>I did not listen to the voice of my instructors Or pay attention to my teachers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>I have come to the brink of complete ruin In the midst of the entire congregation.”* <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Drink water from your own cistern And flowing* water from your own well. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Should your springs be dispersed outside, Your streams of water in the public squares? <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let them be for you alone, And not for strangers with you. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>May your own fountain* be blessed, And may you rejoice with the wife of your youth, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A loving doe, a graceful mountain goat.* Let her breasts satisfy* you at all times. May you be captivated by her love constantly. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So why, my son, should you be captivated by a wayward* woman Or embrace the bosom of an immoral* woman? <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah; He examines all his paths. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>The wicked one is ensnared by his own errors, And he will be caught in the ropes of his own sin. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>He will die for lack of discipline And go astray because of his excessive foolishness. </p><p><strong>6 </strong>My son, if you have put up security* for your neighbor, If you have given your handshake* to a stranger,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>If you have been ensnared by your promise, Caught by the words of your mouth,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do this, my son, and free yourself, For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not allow your eyes to sleep, Nor your eyelids to slumber.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand, Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Go to the ant, you lazy one; Observe its ways and become wise.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It prepares its food in the summer, And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech; <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With a perverted heart, He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly; In a moment he will be broken beyond healing. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There are six things that Jehovah hates; Yes, seven things that he* detests: <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A false witness who lies with every breath, And anyone sowing contentions among brothers. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Observe, my son, the commandment of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Always bind them around your heart; Tie them about your neck. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When you walk about, it will lead you; When you lie down, it will stand guard over you; And when you awaken, it will speak to you.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For the commandment is a lamp, And the law is a light, And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They will guard you against the bad woman, Against the seductive tongue of the immoral* woman. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not desire her beauty in your heart Or allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread, But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet? <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife; No one who touches her will go unpunished. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>People do not despise a thief If he steals to satisfy himself* when he is hungry. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold; He will give up all the valuables of his house. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;* The one who does so brings ruin on himself.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He will get only wounds and dishonor, And his disgrace will not be wiped away. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For jealousy makes a husband furious; He will show no compassion when he takes revenge. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He will accept no compensation;* He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “To know.”</p><p>Or “what is just.”</p><p>Or “fairness.”</p><p>Or “wise guidance.”</p><p>Or “a parable.”</p><p>Or “reverence for.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “Throw in your lot with us.”</p><p>Or “share a common bag (purse).”</p><p>Or “souls.”</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Lit., “head.”</p><p>Or “Turn back when I reprove.”</p><p>Lit., “eat from the fruit.”</p><p>Or “schemes; plans.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Lit., “strange.” Evidently, one morally estranged from God.</p><p>Or “seductive.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” Evidently, one morally alienated from God.</p><p>Or “the husband.”</p><p>Lit., “tracks.”</p><p>Lit., “going in to.”</p><p>Or “the one who keeps integrity.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “truth.”</p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “winepresses.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Evidently referring to God’s qualities mentioned in the previous verses.</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “strike against anything.”</p><p>Or “to whom it is owing.”</p><p>Or “within the power of your hand.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “the prime.”</p><p>Lit., “Incline your ear.”</p><p>Lit., “to all their flesh.”</p><p>Or “beaming eyes.”</p><p>Or possibly, “Carefully consider.”</p><p>Lit., “Incline your ear.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “Sheol,” that is, the common grave of mankind. See Glossary.</p><p>Or “power.”</p><p>Lit., “In the midst of the assembly and the congregation.”</p><p>Or “fresh.”</p><p>Or “water source.”</p><p>Or “ibex.”</p><p>Or “intoxicate.”</p><p>Lit., “strange.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Lit., “gone surety.”</p><p>That is, in a pledge.</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “instruct you.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “fill his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “ransom.”</p></div>
<div class="extScrpCite"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="202016363.xhtml#citationsource6">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:20-35)</strong></a> <span id="citation6"></span>Observe, my son, the commandment of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Always bind them around your heart; Tie them about your neck. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When you walk about, it will lead you; When you lie down, it will stand guard over you; And when you awaken, it will speak to you.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For the commandment is a lamp, And the law is a light, And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They will guard you against the bad woman, Against the seductive tongue of the immoral* woman. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not desire her beauty in your heart Or allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread, But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet? <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife; No one who touches her will go unpunished. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>People do not despise a thief If he steals to satisfy himself* when he is hungry. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold; He will give up all the valuables of his house. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;* The one who does so brings ruin on himself.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He will get only wounds and dishonor, And his disgrace will not be wiped away. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For jealousy makes a husband furious; He will show no compassion when he takes revenge. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He will accept no compensation;* He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “instruct you.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “fill his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “ransom.”</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExtPubRef">
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource1">^ <span id="pcitation1"></span><strong>***sn song 37 The Scriptures—Inspired of God***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 37</p>
<h1><strong>The Scriptures<wbr />—Inspired of God</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource8"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation8">2 Timothy 3:16, 17</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. God’s Word is a shining light,</p>
<p class="p5">Guides our feet through earth’s dark night.</p>
<p class="p6">If we follow it faithfully,</p>
<p class="p7">Surely its truth will set us free.</p>
<p class="p8">2. That divine Word is inspired,</p>
<p class="p9">Teaches us what is required.</p>
<p class="p10">Help it gives, setting all things straight,</p>
<p class="p11">And for God’s discipline to wait.</p>
<p class="p12">3. By these Scriptures from above,</p>
<p class="p13">We have come to know God’s love.</p>
<p class="p14">Reading daily will make us wise,</p>
<p class="p15">Showing us how to gain life’s prize.</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p16">(See also <span id="citationsource9"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation9">Ps. 119:105;</a><span id="citationsource10"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation10"> Prov. 4:13</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation8"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource8">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16, 17)</strong></a> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation9"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource9">^ <strong>(Ps. 119:105)</strong></a> Your word is a lamp to my foot, And a light for my path.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation10"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource10">^ <strong>(Prov. 4:13)</strong></a> Hold on to discipline; do not let it go. Safeguard it, for it means your life.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource3">^ <span id="pcitation3"></span><strong>***w00 1/15 pp. 23-24 Cultivate Intimacy With Jehovah***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Cultivate Intimacy With Jehovah</strong></p>
<p class="p2">“DRAW close to God, and he will draw close to you,” wrote the disciple James. (<span id="citationsource11"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation11">James 4:8</a>) And the psalmist David sang: “The intimacy with Jehovah belongs to those fearful of him.” (<span id="citationsource12"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation12">Psalm 25:14</a>) Clearly, Jehovah God wants us to have an intimate relationship with him. Yet, not everyone worshiping God and obeying his laws necessarily feels close to him.</p>
<p class="p3">What about you? Do you have a close personal relationship with God? Undoubtedly, you want to draw closer to him. How may we cultivate intimacy with God? What would this mean for us? The third chapter of the Bible <span id="citationsource13"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation13">book of Proverbs 3</a> provides answers.</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>Manifest Loving-Kindness and Trueness</strong></p>
<p class="p5">King Solomon of ancient Israel commences <span id="citationsource14"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation14">the third chapter of Proverbs</a> with the words: <em>“My son, my law do not forget, and my commandments may your heart observe,</em> <em>because length of days and years of life and peace will be added to you.” </em>(<span id="citationsource15"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation15">Proverbs 3:1, 2</a>) Since Solomon wrote under divine inspiration, this fatherly advice is really coming from Jehovah God and is directed to us. We are counseled here to abide by God’s reminders<wbr />—his law, or teaching, and his commandments—<wbr />recorded in the Bible. If we do this, “length of days and years of life and peace will be added” to us. Yes, even now we can enjoy a peaceful life and can avoid pursuits that expose us to the danger of early death that often befalls evildoers. Moreover, we can entertain the hope of eternal life in a peaceful new world.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource16"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation16">Proverbs 1:24-31;</a><span id="citationsource17"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation17"> 2:21, 22</a>.</p>
<p class="p6">Continuing, Solomon says: <em>“May loving-kindness and trueness themselves not leave you. Tie them about your throat. Write them upon the tablet of your heart, and so find favor and good insight in the eyes of God and of earthling man.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource18"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation18">Proverbs 3:3, 4</a>.</p>
<p class="p7">The original-language word for “loving-kindness” is alternatively rendered “loyal love” and entails fidelity, solidarity, and loyalty. Are we determined to remain attached to Jehovah come what may? Do we display loving-kindness in our relationships with fellow believers? Do we work to remain close to them? In day-to-day dealings with them, do we keep ‘the law of loving-kindness upon our tongue’ even under trying conditions?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource19"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation19">Proverbs 31:26</a>.</p>
<p class="p8">Being abundant in loving-kindness, Jehovah is “ready to forgive.” (<span id="citationsource20"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation20">Psalm 86:5</a>) If we have repented of our past sins and are now making straight paths for our feet, we are assured that “seasons of refreshing” will come from Jehovah. (<span id="citationsource21"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation21">Acts 3:19</a>) Should we not imitate our God by forgiving others of their trespasses?<wbr />—<span id="citationsource22"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation22">Matthew 6:14, 15</a>.</p>
<p class="p9">Jehovah is “the God of truth,” and he wants “trueness” from those seeking intimacy with him. (<span id="citationsource23"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation23">Psalm 31:5</a>) Can we really expect Jehovah to be our Friend if we lead a double life<wbr />—acting one way around Christian associates and another way when out of their sight—<wbr />like “men of untruth” who hide what kind of people they are? (<span id="citationsource24"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation24">Psalm 26:4</a>) How foolish that would be, since “all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes” of Jehovah!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource25"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation25">Hebrews 4:13</a>.</p>
<p class="p10">Loving-kindness and trueness are to be valued as a priceless necklace ‘tied about our throat,’ for they help us ‘find favor in the eyes of God and earthling man.’ We need not only to display these qualities outwardly but also to engrave them ‘on the tablet of our heart,’ making them an intrinsic part of our personality.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>Cultivate Implicit Trust in Jehovah</strong></p>
<p class="p12">The wise king continues: <em>“Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding.</em> <em>In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource26"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation26">Proverbs 3:5, 6</a>.</p>
<p class="p13">Jehovah is certainly worthy of our complete trust. As the Creator, he is “vigorous in power” and is the Source of “dynamic energy.” (<span id="citationsource27"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation27">Isaiah 40:26,</a><span id="citationsource28"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation28"> 29</a>) He is able to carry out all that he has purposed. Why, his very name literally means “He Causes to Become,” and it builds our confidence in his ability to fulfill what he has promised! The fact that “it is impossible for God to lie” makes him the very epitome of truth. (<span id="citationsource29"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation29">Hebrews 6:18</a>) His dominant quality is love. (<span id="citationsource30"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation30">1 John 4:8</a>) He is “righteous in all his ways and loyal in all his works.” (<span id="citationsource31"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation31">Psalm 145:17</a>) If we cannot trust God, whom can we trust? Of course, to cultivate trust in him, we need to “taste and see that Jehovah is good” by applying what we learn from the Bible in our personal life and by reflecting upon the good that this produces.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource32"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation32">Psalm 34:8</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">How may we ‘take notice of Jehovah in all our ways’? The inspired psalmist says: “I shall certainly meditate on all your activity, and with your dealings I will concern myself.” (<span id="citationsource33"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation33">Psalm 77:12</a>) Since God is invisible, meditation on his great acts and on his dealings with his people is vital for cultivating intimacy with him.</p>
<p class="p15">Prayer is also an important way of taking notice of Jehovah. King David kept calling on Jehovah “all day long.” (<span id="citationsource34"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation34">Psalm 86:3</a>) David often prayed through the night, as when he was a fugitive in the wilderness. (<span id="citationsource35"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation35">Psalm 63:6, 7</a>) “Carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit,” exhorted the apostle Paul. (<span id="citationsource36"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation36">Ephesians 6:18</a>) How often do we pray? Do we enjoy having personal heartfelt communication with God? When faced with trying situations, do we petition him for help? Do we prayerfully seek his guidance before making important decisions? Our sincere prayers to Jehovah endear us to him. And we have the assurance that he will listen to our prayer and ‘make our paths straight.’</p>
<p class="p16">How foolish it is to ‘lean upon our own understanding’ or that of prominent people in the world when we can place our complete confidence in Jehovah! <em>“Do not become wise in your own eyes,” </em>says Solomon. On the contrary, he admonishes: <em>“Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad. May it become a healing to your navel and a refreshment to your bones.” </em>(<span id="citationsource37"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation37">Proverbs 3:7, 8</a>) The healthy fear of displeasing God ought to govern all our actions, thoughts, and emotions. Such reverential fear prevents us from doing what is bad and is spiritually healing and refreshing.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>Give Jehovah Your Best</strong></p>
<p class="p18">In what other way may we draw close to God? <em>“Honor Jehovah with your valuable things and with the firstfruits of all your produce,” </em>instructs the king. (<span id="citationsource38"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation38">Proverbs 3:9</a>) To honor Jehovah means to show him high regard and to exalt him publicly by sharing in and supporting the public proclamation of his name. The valuable things with which we honor Jehovah are our time, our talents, our strength, and our material possessions. These must be the firstfruits<wbr />—our very best. Should </p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation11"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource11">^ <strong>(Jas. 4:8)</strong></a> Draw close to God, and he will draw close to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you indecisive ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation12"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource12">^ <strong>(Ps. 25:14)</strong></a> Close friendship with Jehovah belongs to those who fear him, And he makes his covenant known to them.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation13"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource13">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:1-35)</strong></a> My son, do not forget my teaching,* And may your heart observe my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not let loyal love and faithfulness* leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then your storehouses will be completely filled, And your vats* will overflow with new wine. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, And do not loathe his reproof, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, Just as a father does a son in whom he delights. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who finds wisdom And the man who acquires discernment; <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>To gain it is better than gaining silver, And having it as profit is better than having gold. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is more precious than corals;* Nothing you desire can compare to it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Long life is in its right hand; Riches and glory are in its left hand. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Its ways are pleasant, And all its paths are peaceful. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart And the cloudy skies dripped with dew. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, do not lose sight of them.* Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability; <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>They will give you* life And be an adornment for your neck; <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then you will walk on your way in safety, And your foot will never stumble.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When you lie down, you will have no fear; You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You will not fear any sudden terror Nor the storm that is coming on the wicked. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it* If it is within your power* to help. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not plot harm against your neighbor When he lives in a sense of security with you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Do not quarrel with a man for no reason If he has done nothing bad to you. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not envy the violent man Nor choose any of his ways, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For Jehovah detests a devious person, But His close friendship is with the upright. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one, But he blesses the home of the righteous. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The wise will inherit honor, But the stupid ones glorify dishonor.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “truth.”</p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “winepresses.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Evidently referring to God’s qualities mentioned in the previous verses.</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “strike against anything.”</p><p>Or “to whom it is owing.”</p><p>Or “within the power of your hand.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation14"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource14">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:1-35)</strong></a> My son, do not forget my teaching,* And may your heart observe my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do not let loyal love and faithfulness* leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;* <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then your storehouses will be completely filled, And your vats* will overflow with new wine. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>My son, do not reject the discipline of Jehovah, And do not loathe his reproof, <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>For those whom Jehovah loves he reproves, Just as a father does a son in whom he delights. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>Happy is the man who finds wisdom And the man who acquires discernment; <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>To gain it is better than gaining silver, And having it as profit is better than having gold. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>It is more precious than corals;* Nothing you desire can compare to it. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Long life is in its right hand; Riches and glory are in its left hand. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Its ways are pleasant, And all its paths are peaceful. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>It is a tree of life to those who take hold of it, And those who keep firm hold of it will be called happy. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Jehovah founded the earth in wisdom. He solidly established the heavens in discernment. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>By his knowledge the watery deeps were split apart And the cloudy skies dripped with dew. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>My son, do not lose sight of them.* Safeguard practical wisdom and thinking ability; <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>They will give you* life And be an adornment for your neck; <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>Then you will walk on your way in safety, And your foot will never stumble.* <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>When you lie down, you will have no fear; You will lie down, and your sleep will be pleasant. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You will not fear any sudden terror Nor the storm that is coming on the wicked. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For Jehovah will prove to be your source of confidence; He will keep your foot from being caught. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it* If it is within your power* to help. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Do not say to your neighbor, “Go away; come back later! I will give it to you tomorrow,” If you can give it now. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Do not plot harm against your neighbor When he lives in a sense of security with you. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Do not quarrel with a man for no reason If he has done nothing bad to you. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Do not envy the violent man Nor choose any of his ways, <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>For Jehovah detests a devious person, But His close friendship is with the upright. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>The curse of Jehovah is on the house of the wicked one, But he blesses the home of the righteous. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For he mocks those who ridicule, But he shows favor to the meek. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>The wise will inherit honor, But the stupid ones glorify dishonor.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “truth.”</p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p><p>Or “winepresses.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Evidently referring to God’s qualities mentioned in the previous verses.</p><p>Or “your soul.”</p><p>Or “strike against anything.”</p><p>Or “to whom it is owing.”</p><p>Or “within the power of your hand.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation15"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource15">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:1, 2)</strong></a> My son, do not forget my teaching,* And may your heart observe my commandments,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Because they will add many days And years of life and peace to you.</p><p></p><p>Or “law.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation16"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource16">^ <strong>(Prov. 1:24-31)</strong></a> Because I called out, but you kept refusing, I stretched out my hand, but no one was paying attention, <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>You kept neglecting all my advice And rejecting my reproof, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>I also will laugh when disaster strikes you; I will mock when what you dread comes, <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When what you dread comes like a storm, And your disaster arrives like a storm wind, When distress and trouble come upon you. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>At that time they will keep calling me, but I will not answer; They will eagerly look for me, but they will not find me, <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>Because they hated knowledge, And they did not choose to fear Jehovah. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>They refused my advice; They disrespected all my reproof. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>So they will bear the consequences* of their way, And they will be glutted with their own counsel.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “eat from the fruit.”</p><p>Or “schemes; plans.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation17"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource17">^ <strong>(Prov. 2:21, 22)</strong></a> For only the upright will reside in the earth, And the blameless* will remain in it. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>As for the wicked, they will be cut off from the earth, And the treacherous will be torn away from it.</p><p></p><p>Or “the one who keeps integrity.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation18"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource18">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:3, 4)</strong></a> Do not let loyal love and faithfulness* leave you. Tie them around your neck; Write them on the tablet of your heart;  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Then you will find favor and good insight In the eyes of God and man.</p><p></p><p>Or “truth.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation19"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource19">^ <strong>(Prov. 31:26)</strong></a> She opens her mouth in wisdom; The law of kindness* is on her tongue.</p><p></p><p>Or “Loving instruction; The law of loyal love.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation20"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource20">^ <strong>(Ps. 86:5)</strong></a> For you, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive; You abound in loyal love for all those who call on you.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation21"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource21">^ <strong>(Acts 3:19)</strong></a> “Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get your sins blotted out, so that seasons of refreshing may come from Jehovah himself*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “from the face of Jehovah.” See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation22"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource22">^ <strong>(Matt. 6:14, 15)</strong></a> “For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>whereas if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation23"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource23">^ <strong>(Ps. 31:5)</strong></a> Into your hand I entrust my spirit. You have redeemed me, O Jehovah, the God of truth.*</p><p></p><p>Or “the faithful God.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation24"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource24">^ <strong>(Ps. 26:4)</strong></a> I do not associate* with deceitful men, And I avoid those who hide what they are.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “sit.”</p><p>Or “I do not mingle with hypocrites.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation25"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource25">^ <strong>(Heb. 4:13)</strong></a> And there is not a creation that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation26"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource26">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong></a> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation27"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource27">^ <strong>(Isa. 40:26)</strong></a> “Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number; He calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, Not one of them is missing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation28"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource28">^ <strong>(Isa. 40:29)</strong></a> He gives power to the tired one And full might to those lacking strength.*</p><p></p><p>Or “dynamic energy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation29"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource29">^ <strong>(Heb. 6:18)</strong></a> in order that through two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to the refuge may have strong encouragement to take firm hold of the hope set before us.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation30"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource30">^ <strong>(1 John 4:8)</strong></a> Whoever does not love has not come to know God, because God is love.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation31"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource31">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:17)</strong></a> Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation32"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource32">^ <strong>(Ps. 34:8)</strong></a> Taste and see that Jehovah is good; Happy is the man who takes refuge in him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation33"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource33">^ <strong>(Ps. 77:12)</strong></a> And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation34"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource34">^ <strong>(Ps. 86:3)</strong></a> Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation35"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource35">^ <strong>(Ps. 63:6, 7)</strong></a> I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation36"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource36">^ <strong>(Eph. 6:18)</strong></a> while with every form of prayer and supplication you carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit. And to that end stay awake, constantly making supplication in behalf of all the holy ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation37"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource37">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:7, 8)</strong></a> Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation38"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource38">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:9)</strong></a> Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;*</p><p></p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource4">^ <span id="pcitation4"></span><strong>***w00 1/15 p. 24 Cultivate Intimacy With Jehovah***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p9">“men of untruth” who hide what kind of people they are? (<span id="citationsource39"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation39">Psalm 26:4</a>) How foolish that would be, since “all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes” of Jehovah!<wbr />—<span id="citationsource40"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation40">Hebrews 4:13</a>.</p>
<p class="p10">Loving-kindness and trueness are to be valued as a priceless necklace ‘tied about our throat,’ for they help us ‘find favor in the eyes of God and earthling man.’ We need not only to display these qualities outwardly but also to engrave them ‘on the tablet of our heart,’ making them an intrinsic part of our personality.</p>
<p class="p11"><strong>Cultivate Implicit Trust in Jehovah</strong></p>
<p class="p12">The wise king continues: <em>“Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding.</em> <em>In all your ways take notice of him, and he himself will make your paths straight.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource41"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation41">Proverbs 3:5, 6</a>.</p>
<p class="p13">Jehovah is certainly worthy of our complete trust. As the Creator, he is “vigorous in power” and is the Source of “dynamic energy.” (<span id="citationsource42"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation42">Isaiah 40:26,</a><span id="citationsource43"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation43"> 29</a>) He is able to carry out all that he has purposed. Why, his very name literally means “He Causes to Become,” and it builds our confidence in his ability to fulfill what he has promised! The fact that “it is impossible for God to lie” makes him the very epitome of truth. (<span id="citationsource44"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation44">Hebrews 6:18</a>) His dominant quality is love. (<span id="citationsource45"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation45">1 John 4:8</a>) He is “righteous in all his ways and loyal in all his works.” (<span id="citationsource46"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation46">Psalm 145:17</a>) If we cannot trust God, whom can we trust? Of course, to cultivate trust in him, we need to “taste and see that Jehovah is good” by applying what we learn from the Bible in our personal life and by reflecting upon the good that this produces.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource47"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation47">Psalm 34:8</a>.</p>
<p class="p14">How may we ‘take notice of Jehovah in all our ways’? The inspired psalmist says: “I shall certainly meditate on all your activity, and with your dealings I will concern myself.” (<span id="citationsource48"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation48">Psalm 77:12</a>) Since God is invisible, meditation on his great acts and on his dealings with his people is vital for cultivating intimacy with him.</p>
<p class="p15">Prayer is also an important way of taking notice of Jehovah. King David kept calling on Jehovah “all day long.” (<span id="citationsource49"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation49">Psalm 86:3</a>) David often prayed through the night, as when he was a fugitive in the wilderness. (<span id="citationsource50"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation50">Psalm 63:6, 7</a>) “Carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit,” exhorted the apostle Paul. (<span id="citationsource51"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation51">Ephesians 6:18</a>) How often do we pray? Do we enjoy having personal heartfelt communication with God? When faced with trying situations, do we petition him for help? Do we prayerfully seek his guidance before making important decisions? Our sincere prayers to Jehovah endear us to him. And we have the assurance that he will listen to our prayer and ‘make our paths straight.’</p>
<p class="p16">How foolish it is to ‘lean upon our own understanding’ or that of prominent people in the world when we can place our complete confidence in Jehovah! <em>“Do not become wise in your own eyes,” </em>says Solomon. On the contrary, he admonishes: <em>“Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad. May it become a healing to your navel and a refreshment to your bones.” </em>(<span id="citationsource52"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation52">Proverbs 3:7, 8</a>) The healthy fear of displeasing God ought to govern all our actions, thoughts, and emotions. Such reverential fear prevents us from doing what is bad and is spiritually healing and refreshing.</p>
<p class="p17"><strong>Give Jehovah Your Best</strong></p>
<p class="p18">In what other way may we draw close to God? <em>“Honor Jehovah with your valuable things and with the firstfruits of all your produce,” </em>instructs the king. (<span id="citationsource53"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation53">Proverbs 3:9</a>) To honor Jehovah means to show him high regard and to exalt him publicly by sharing in and supporting the public proclamation of his name. The valuable things with which we honor Jehovah are our time, our talents, our strength, and our material possessions. These must be the firstfruits<wbr />—our very best. Should </p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation39"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource39">^ <strong>(Ps. 26:4)</strong></a> I do not associate* with deceitful men, And I avoid those who hide what they are.*</p><p></p><p>Lit., “sit.”</p><p>Or “I do not mingle with hypocrites.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation40"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource40">^ <strong>(Heb. 4:13)</strong></a> And there is not a creation that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of the one to whom we must give an account.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation41"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource41">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:5, 6)</strong></a> Trust in Jehovah with all your heart, And do not rely* on your own understanding.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>In all your ways take notice of him, And he will make your paths straight.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “lean.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation42"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource42">^ <strong>(Isa. 40:26)</strong></a> “Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things? It is the One who brings out their army by number; He calls them all by name. Because of his vast dynamic energy and his awe-inspiring power, Not one of them is missing.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation43"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource43">^ <strong>(Isa. 40:29)</strong></a> He gives power to the tired one And full might to those lacking strength.*</p><p></p><p>Or “dynamic energy.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation44"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource44">^ <strong>(Heb. 6:18)</strong></a> in order that through two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to the refuge may have strong encouragement to take firm hold of the hope set before us.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation45"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource45">^ <strong>(1 John 4:8)</strong></a> Whoever does not love has not come to know God, because God is love.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation46"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource46">^ <strong>(Ps. 145:17)</strong></a> Jehovah is righteous in all his ways And loyal in all that he does.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation47"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource47">^ <strong>(Ps. 34:8)</strong></a> Taste and see that Jehovah is good; Happy is the man who takes refuge in him.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation48"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource48">^ <strong>(Ps. 77:12)</strong></a> And I will meditate on all your activity And ponder over your dealings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation49"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource49">^ <strong>(Ps. 86:3)</strong></a> Show me favor, O Jehovah, For I call to you all day long.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation50"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource50">^ <strong>(Ps. 63:6, 7)</strong></a> I remember you while upon my bed; I meditate on you during the watches of the night.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>For you are my helper, And I shout joyfully in the shadow of your wings.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation51"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource51">^ <strong>(Eph. 6:18)</strong></a> while with every form of prayer and supplication you carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit. And to that end stay awake, constantly making supplication in behalf of all the holy ones.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation52"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource52">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:7, 8)</strong></a> Do not become wise in your own eyes. Fear Jehovah and turn away from bad.  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It will be a healing to your body* And refreshment for your bones.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “navel.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation53"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource53">^ <strong>(Prov. 3:9)</strong></a> Honor Jehovah with your valuable things, With the firstfruits* of all your produce;*</p><p></p><p>Or “very best.”</p><p>Or “income.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource5">^ <span id="pcitation5"></span><strong>***w06 9/15 p. 17 par. 1 Highlights From the Book of Proverbs***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p9"><strong>Scriptural Questions Answered:</strong></p>
<p class="p10"><span id="citationsource54"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation54"><strong>1:7;</strong></a><span id="citationsource55"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation55"> <strong>9:10</strong></a><wbr /><strong>—In what way is the fear of Jehovah “the beginning of knowledge” and “the start of wisdom”?</strong> Without the fear of Jehovah, there can be no knowledge, for he is the Creator of all things and the Author of the Scriptures. (<span id="citationsource56"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation56">Romans 1:20;</a><span id="citationsource57"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation57"> 2 Timothy 3:16, 17</a>) He is the very Source of all true knowledge. Hence, knowledge begins with the reverential fear of Jehovah. Godly fear is also the start of wisdom because there can be no wisdom without knowledge. Moreover, a person who lacks the fear of Jehovah will not use whatever knowledge he has to honor the Creator.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation54"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource54">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 1:7)</strong> The fear of* Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.</p><p></p><p>Or “reverence for.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation55"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource55">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 9:10)</strong> The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, And knowledge of the Most Holy One is understanding.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation56"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource56">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Rom. 1:20)</strong> For his invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation57"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource57">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16, 17)</strong> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource6">^ <span id="pcitation6"></span><strong>***it-2 p. 180 Knowledge***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p3"><strong>Source of Knowledge. </strong>Jehovah is actually the basic Source of knowledge. Life, of course, is from him and life is essential for one’s having any knowledge. (<span id="citationsource58"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation58">Ps 36:9;</a><span id="citationsource59"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation59"> Ac 17:25,</a><span id="citationsource60"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation60"> 28</a>) Furthermore, God created all things, so human knowledge is based on a study of God’s handiwork. (<span id="citationsource61"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation61">Re 4:11;</a><span id="citationsource62"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation62"> Ps 19:1, 2</a>) God also inspired his written Word, from which man can learn the divine will and purposes. (<span id="citationsource63"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation63">2Ti 3:16, 17</a>) Thus the focal point of all true knowledge is Jehovah, and a person seeking it ought to have a fear of God that makes him careful not to incur Jehovah’s displeasure. Such fear is the beginning of knowledge. (<span id="citationsource64"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation64">Pr 1:7</a>) Such godly fear puts one in position to gain accurate knowledge, whereas those who do not consider God readily draw wrong conclusions from the things that they observe.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation58"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource58">^ <strong>(Ps. 36:9)</strong></a> With you is the source of life; By your light we can see light.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation59"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource59">^ <strong>(Acts 17:25)</strong></a> nor is he served by human hands as if he needed anything, because he himself gives to all people life and breath and all things.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation60"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource60">^ <strong>(Acts 17:28)</strong></a> For by him we have life and move and exist, even as some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his children.’*</p><p></p><p>Or “progeny.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation61"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource61">^ <strong>(Rev. 4:11)</strong></a> “You are worthy, Jehovah* our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they came into existence and were created.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation62"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource62">^ <strong>(Ps. 19:1, 2)</strong></a> The heavens are declaring the glory of God; The skies above* proclaim the work of his hands.  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Day after day their speech bubbles forth, And night after night they reveal knowledge.</p><p></p><p>Or “expanse.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation63"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource63">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 3:16, 17)</strong></a> All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight,* for disciplining in righteousness, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>so that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.</p><p></p><p>Or “correcting.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation64"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource64">^ <strong>(Prov. 1:7)</strong></a> The fear of* Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. Only fools despise wisdom and discipline.</p><p></p><p>Or “reverence for.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource7">^ <span id="pcitation7"></span><strong>***w00 9/15 pp. 25-26 Safeguard Your Name***</strong></a></p>
<p class="p1"><strong>Safeguard Your Name</strong></p>
<p class="p2">A MAN who designs beautiful buildings makes a name for himself as an expert architect. A young woman who excels scholastically becomes known as a brilliant student. Even a person who does nothing may make a name for himself as a sluggard. Emphasizing the value of making a favorable name, the Bible states: “A good name is more desirable than great riches, a good reputation than silver and gold.”<wbr />—<span id="citationsource65"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation65">Proverbs 22:1</a>, <em>An American Translation.</em></p>
<p class="p3">A good name is developed by many small acts over a period of time. All that is needed to spoil it, though, is one foolish act. A single incident of sexual misconduct, for example, can sully a fine reputation. In the 6th chapter of the Bible <span id="citationsource66"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation66">book of Proverbs 6</a>, King Solomon of ancient Israel provides a warning against attitudes and actions that can spoil our reputation as well as damage our relationship with Jehovah God. Among these are thoughtless pledges, laziness, deceit, and sexual immorality<wbr />—essentially things that Jehovah hates. Giving heed to this advice will help us safeguard our good name.</p>
<p class="p4"><strong>Deliver Yourself From Foolish Pledges</strong></p>
<p class="p5">The <span id="citationsource67"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation67">6th chapter of Proverbs</a> opens with the words: <em>“My son, if you have gone surety for your fellowman, if you have given your handshake even to the stranger, if you have been ensnared by the sayings of your mouth, if you have been caught by the sayings of your mouth, take this action then, my son, and deliver yourself, for you have come into the palm of your fellowman: Go humble yourself and storm your fellowman with importunities.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource68"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation68">Proverbs 6:1-3</a>.</p>
<p class="p6">This proverb counsels against getting involved in the business dealings of others, especially of strangers. Yes, the Israelites were to ‘sustain their brother who had grown poor and become financially weak.’ (<span id="citationsource69"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation69">Leviticus 25:35-38</a>) But some enterprising Israelites got involved in speculative business ventures and obtained financial backing by convincing others to ‘go surety’ for them, thus making them liable for the debt. Similar situations may arise today. Financial institutions, for example, may require a cosigner before approving a loan they consider risky. How unwise to make such a commitment hastily in behalf of others! Why, it may entrap us financially, even giving us a bad name with banks and other creditors!</p>
<p class="p7">What if we find ourselves in the predicament of having taken an action that seemed wise at first but upon closer scrutiny appears foolish? The advice is to set aside pride and “storm your fellowman with importunities”<wbr />—with persistent requests. We must do all we possibly can to set matters straight. One reference work points out: “Leave no stone unturned until you have agreed with your adversary and compromised the matter, so that your bond may not come against you or yours.” And this should be done without delay, for the king adds: <em>“Do not give any sleep to your eyes, nor any slumber to your beaming eyes. Deliver yourself like a gazelle from the hand and like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.” </em>(<span id="citationsource70"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation70">Proverbs 6:4, 5</a>) Better it is to withdraw from an unwise commitment when possible than to be entrapped by it.</p>
<p class="p8"><strong>Be Industrious Like the Ant</strong></p>
<p class="p9"><em>“Go to the ant, you lazy one; see its ways and become wise,” </em>admonishes Solomon. What wisdom can we gain from the ways of a little ant? The king answers: <em>“Although it has no commander, officer or ruler, it prepares its food even in the summer; it has gathered its food supplies even in the harvest.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource71"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation71">Proverbs 6:6-8</a>.</p>
<p class="p10">Ants are marvelously organized and remarkably cooperative with one another. Instinctively, they gather food supplies for the future. They have “no commander, officer or ruler.” True, the queen ant is there, but she is queen only in the sense that she lays eggs and is the mother of the colony. She gives no commands. Even with no foreman to drive them or supervisor to check on them, the ants keep tirelessly at their work.</p>
<p class="p11">Like the ant, should we not also be industrious? Working hard and striving to improve in our work is good for us whether we are being monitored or not. Yes, in school, at our place of employment, and while sharing in spiritual activities, we should do our best. As the ant benefits from its industriousness, so God wants us to ‘see good for all our hard work.’ (<span id="citationsource72"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation72">Ecclesiastes 3:13,</a><span id="citationsource73"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation73"> 22;</a><span id="citationsource74"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation74"> 5:18</a>) A clean conscience and personal satisfaction are the rewards of hard work.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource75"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation75">Ecclesiastes 5:12</a>.</p>
<p class="p12">Using two rhetorical questions, Solomon tries to awaken a slothful one from his indolence: <em>“How long, you lazy one, will you keep lying down? When will you rise up from your sleep?” </em>Mimicking him in speech, the king adds: <em>“A little more sleep, a little more slumbering, a little more folding of the hands in lying down, and your poverty will certainly come just like some rover, and your want like an armed man.” </em>(<span id="citationsource76"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation76">Proverbs 6:9-11</a>) While the lazy one is supine, poverty overtakes him with the speed of a bandit, and scarcity attacks him like an armed man. The fields of a sluggard quickly become full of weeds and nettles. (<span id="citationsource77"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation77">Proverbs 24:30, 31</a>) His business enterprise suffers losses in no time. For how long would an employer tolerate an idler? And can a student who is too lazy to study expect to do well in school?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong>Be Honest</strong></p>
<p class="p14">Outlining yet another type of behavior that ruins a person’s reputation in the community and his relationship with God, Solomon continues: <em>“A good-for-nothing man, a man of hurtfulness, is walking with crookedness of speech, winking with his eye, making signs with his foot, making indications with his fingers. Perverseness is in his heart. He is fabricating something bad all the time. He keeps sending out merely contentions.”<wbr /></em>—<span id="citationsource78"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation78">Proverbs 6:12-14</a>.</p>
<p class="p15">This description is that of a deceiver. A liar usually tries to conceal his untruthfulness.</p>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation65"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource65">^ <strong>(Prov. 22:1)</strong></a> A good name* is to be chosen rather than great wealth; To be respected* is better than silver and gold.</p><p></p><p>Or “A good reputation.” Lit., “A name.”</p><p>Lit., “Favor.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation66"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource66">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:1-35)</strong></a> My son, if you have put up security* for your neighbor, If you have given your handshake* to a stranger,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>If you have been ensnared by your promise, Caught by the words of your mouth,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do this, my son, and free yourself, For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not allow your eyes to sleep, Nor your eyelids to slumber.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand, Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Go to the ant, you lazy one; Observe its ways and become wise.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It prepares its food in the summer, And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech; <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With a perverted heart, He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly; In a moment he will be broken beyond healing. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There are six things that Jehovah hates; Yes, seven things that he* detests: <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A false witness who lies with every breath, And anyone sowing contentions among brothers. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Observe, my son, the commandment of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Always bind them around your heart; Tie them about your neck. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When you walk about, it will lead you; When you lie down, it will stand guard over you; And when you awaken, it will speak to you.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For the commandment is a lamp, And the law is a light, And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They will guard you against the bad woman, Against the seductive tongue of the immoral* woman. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not desire her beauty in your heart Or allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread, But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet? <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife; No one who touches her will go unpunished. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>People do not despise a thief If he steals to satisfy himself* when he is hungry. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold; He will give up all the valuables of his house. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;* The one who does so brings ruin on himself.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He will get only wounds and dishonor, And his disgrace will not be wiped away. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For jealousy makes a husband furious; He will show no compassion when he takes revenge. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He will accept no compensation;* He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “gone surety.”</p><p>That is, in a pledge.</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “instruct you.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “fill his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “ransom.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation67"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource67">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:1-35)</strong></a> My son, if you have put up security* for your neighbor, If you have given your handshake* to a stranger,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>If you have been ensnared by your promise, Caught by the words of your mouth,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do this, my son, and free yourself, For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>Do not allow your eyes to sleep, Nor your eyelids to slumber.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand, Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.  <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Go to the ant, you lazy one; Observe its ways and become wise.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It prepares its food in the summer, And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.  <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech; <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With a perverted heart, He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>Therefore, his disaster will come suddenly; In a moment he will be broken beyond healing. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>There are six things that Jehovah hates; Yes, seven things that he* detests: <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>A heart plotting wicked schemes, and feet that run quickly to evil, <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>A false witness who lies with every breath, And anyone sowing contentions among brothers. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Observe, my son, the commandment of your father, And do not forsake the instruction* of your mother. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>Always bind them around your heart; Tie them about your neck. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>When you walk about, it will lead you; When you lie down, it will stand guard over you; And when you awaken, it will speak to you.* <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>For the commandment is a lamp, And the law is a light, And the reproofs of discipline are the way to life. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>They will guard you against the bad woman, Against the seductive tongue of the immoral* woman. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Do not desire her beauty in your heart Or allow her to captivate you with her alluring eyes, <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>For because of a prostitute, a man is reduced to a loaf of bread, But the wife of another man preys on a precious life.* <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Can a man rake fire to his chest and not burn his garments? <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Or can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet? <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>It is the same with anyone having relations with his neighbor’s wife; No one who touches her will go unpunished. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>People do not despise a thief If he steals to satisfy himself* when he is hungry. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>Yet, when found, he will repay sevenfold; He will give up all the valuables of his house. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>Anyone committing adultery with a woman is lacking good sense;* The one who does so brings ruin on himself.* <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>He will get only wounds and dishonor, And his disgrace will not be wiped away. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>For jealousy makes a husband furious; He will show no compassion when he takes revenge. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>He will accept no compensation;* He will not be appeased, no matter how large you make the gift.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “gone surety.”</p><p>That is, in a pledge.</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “law.”</p><p>Or “instruct you.”</p><p>Lit., “foreign.” See Pr 2:16.</p><p>Or “soul.”</p><p>Or “fill his soul.”</p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p><p>Or “his soul.”</p><p>Or “ransom.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation68"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource68">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:1-3)</strong></a> My son, if you have put up security* for your neighbor, If you have given your handshake* to a stranger,  <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>If you have been ensnared by your promise, Caught by the words of your mouth,  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Do this, my son, and free yourself, For you have fallen into the hand of your neighbor: Go and humble yourself and urgently plead with your neighbor.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “gone surety.”</p><p>That is, in a pledge.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation69"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource69">^ <strong>(Lev. 25:35-38)</strong></a> “‘If your brother who is nearby becomes poor and cannot support himself, you must sustain him as you would a foreign resident and a settler, so that he may keep alive with you. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>Do not take interest or make a profit* from him. You must be in fear of your God, and your brother will keep alive with you. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>You must not lend him your money on interest or give out your food for profit. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Caʹnaan, to prove myself your God.</p><p></p><p>Or “take usury.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation70"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource70">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:4, 5)</strong></a> Do not allow your eyes to sleep, Nor your eyelids to slumber.  <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Free yourself like a gazelle from the hunter’s hand, Like a bird from the hand of the birdcatcher.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation71"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource71">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:6-8)</strong></a> Go to the ant, you lazy one; Observe its ways and become wise.  <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Although it has no commander, officer, or ruler,  <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>It prepares its food in the summer, And it gathers its food supplies in the harvest.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation72"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource72">^ <strong>(Eccl. 3:13)</strong></a> also that everyone should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all his hard work. It is the gift of God.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation73"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource73">^ <strong>(Eccl. 3:22)</strong></a> And I saw that there is nothing better than for a man to find enjoyment in his work, because that is his reward;* for who can enable him to see what will happen after he is gone?</p><p></p><p>Or “portion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation74"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource74">^ <strong>(Eccl. 5:18)</strong></a> This is what I have seen to be good and proper: that one should eat and drink and find enjoyment for all the hard work at which he toils under the sun during the few days of life that the true God has given him, for that is his reward.*</p><p></p><p>Or “portion.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation75"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource75">^ <strong>(Eccl. 5:12)</strong></a> Sweet is the sleep of the one serving, whether he eats little or much, but the plenty belonging to the rich one does not permit him to sleep.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation76"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource76">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:9-11)</strong></a> How long, you lazy one, will you lie there? When will you rise up from your sleep? <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>A little sleep, a little slumbering, A little folding of the hands to rest, <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>And your poverty will come like a bandit, And your want like an armed man.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation77"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource77">^ <strong>(Prov. 24:30, 31)</strong></a> I passed by the field of the lazy one, By the vineyard of the man lacking good sense.* <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>I saw that it was overgrown with weeds; The ground was covered with nettles, And its stone wall was broken down.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “in want of heart.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation78"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource78">^ <strong>(Prov. 6:12-14)</strong></a> A useless and wicked man walks about with crooked speech; <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>He winks with his eye, signals with his foot, and motions with his fingers. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>With a perverted heart, He is always scheming evil and spreading contentions.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource8">^ <span id="pcitation8"></span><strong>***sn song 107 Come to Jehovah’s Mountain***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 107</p>
<h1><strong>Come to Jehovah’s Mountain</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource79"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation79">Isaiah 2:2-4</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p4">1. Raise your eyes and behold,</p>
<p class="p5">Far above the highest hill.</p>
<p class="p6">There stands Jehovah’s mountain</p>
<p class="p7">Lifted up in this day.</p>
<p class="p8">People come from afar,</p>
<p class="p9">Ev’rywhere from sea to sea,</p>
<p class="p10">Calling to one another,</p>
<p class="p11">‘Come serve God and obey.’</p>
<p class="p12">Now the time has arrived</p>
<p class="p13">For the small, a great nation to be.</p>
<p class="p14">As we grow and we thrive,</p>
<p class="p15">God’s direction and blessing we see.</p>
<p class="p16">Millions now come to God</p>
<p class="p17">And accept his sov’reignty.</p>
<p class="p18">Loyal they vow to be</p>
<p class="p19">And from his side never stray.</p>
<p class="p20">2. Jesus gave the command</p>
<p class="p21">To go forth and preach the word.</p>
<p class="p22">Good news about the Kingdom</p>
<p class="p23">Reaches all men today.</p>
<p class="p24">Christ now rules from on high,</p>
<p class="p25">Urging all to take his side.</p>
<p class="p26">Meek ones who hear his voice</p>
<p class="p27">Let God’s Word show them the way.</p>
<p class="p28">What a joy to behold</p>
<p class="p29">How a great crowd continues to grow!</p>
<p class="p30">Yes, we all have a share,</p>
<p class="p31">Helping others Jehovah to know.</p>
<p class="p32">Let us lift up the voice,</p>
<p class="p33">Calling out for all to hear,</p>
<p class="p34">‘Come to Jehovah’s mountain,</p>
<p class="p35">Here forever to stay.’</p>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p36">(See also <span id="citationsource80"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation80">Ps. 43:3;</a><span id="citationsource81"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation81"> 99:9;</a><span id="citationsource82"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation82"> Isa. 60:22;</a><span id="citationsource83"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation83"> Acts 16:5</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation79"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource79">^ <strong>(Isa. 2:2-4)</strong></a> In the final part of the days,* The mountain of the house of Jehovah Will become firmly established above the top of the mountains, And it will be raised up above the hills, And to it all the nations will stream.  <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And many peoples will go and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, To the house of the God of Jacob. He will instruct us about his ways, And we will walk in his paths.” For law* will go out of Zion, And the word of Jehovah out of Jerusalem.  <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>He will render judgment among the nations And set matters straight* respecting many peoples. They will beat their swords into plowshares And their spears into pruning shears. Nation will not lift up sword against nation, Nor will they learn war anymore.</p><p></p><p>Or “In the last days.”</p><p>Or “instruction.”</p><p>Or “correct matters.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation80"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource80">^ <strong>(Ps. 43:3)</strong></a> Send out your light and your truth. May these lead me; May they guide me to your holy mountain and to your grand tabernacle.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation81"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource81">^ <strong>(Ps. 99:9)</strong></a> Exalt Jehovah our God And bow down* before his holy mountain, For Jehovah our God is holy.</p><p></p><p>Or “worship.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation82"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource82">^ <strong>(Isa. 60:22)</strong></a> The little one will become a thousand And the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, will speed it up in its own time.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation83"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource83">^ <strong>(Acts 16:5)</strong></a> Then, indeed, the congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number day by day.</p><p></p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource9">^ <span id="pcitation9"></span><strong>***yb16 p. 25-p. 27 The Light Keeps Getting Brighter***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="featureTtl"><strong>HIGHLIGHTS OF THE PAST YEAR</strong></p>
<h1><strong>The Light Keeps Getting Brighter</strong></h1>
</header>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="p3">BECAUSE true worshippers acknowledge Jehovah as the Source of spiritual light, they eagerly pray that God’s ‘light and truth’ will lead and guide them. (<span id="citationsource84"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation84">Ps. 43:3</a>) While the world is in dense spiritual darkness, the true God continues to shed light upon his people. As a result, their path “is like the bright morning light that grows brighter and brighter.” (<span id="citationsource85"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation85">Prov. 4:18</a>) Increasing light from Jehovah continues to illuminate their way organizationally, doctrinally, and morally. What are some of our beliefs that have been clarified in recent years?</p>
</div>
<div class="chart">
<aside><div class="tableDiv"><table><tbody><tr><th><p class="p5"><strong>2012</strong></p>
</th>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p6"><strong>“All these kingdoms”<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource86"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation86">Dan. 2:44</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p7"><em>w12 </em>6/15 p. 17</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p8"><strong>Mordecai and Esther “divide spoil”<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource87"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation87">Gen. 49:27</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p9"><em>w12 </em>1/1 p. 29</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p10"><strong>Ruin caused by “fierce-looking king”<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource88"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation88">Dan. 8:23, 24</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p11"><em>w12 </em>6/15 p. 16</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p12"><strong>Toes of image in Nebuchadnezzar’s dream<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource89"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation89">Dan. 2:41-43</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p13"><em>w12 </em>6/15 p. 16</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p14"><strong>When the seventh world power emerged</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p15"><em>w12 </em>6/15 pp. 15, 19</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><th><p class="p16"><strong>2013</strong></p>
</th>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p17"><strong>“Faithful and discreet slave”<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource90"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation90">Matt. 24:45-47</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p18"><em>w13 </em>7/15 pp. 8, 20-25</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p19"><strong>“Evil slave”<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource91"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation91">Matt. 24:48-51</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p20"><em>w13 </em>7/15 p. 24</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p21"><strong>Anointed not to survive Armageddon on earth</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p22"><em>w13 </em>7/15 p. 5</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p23"><strong>‘Assyrian invades our land’<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource92"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation92">Mic. 5:5</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p24"><em>w13 </em>11/15 p. 20</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p25"><strong>Chosen ones gathered<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource93"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation93">Matt. 24:31;</a><span id="citationsource94"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation94"> Mark 13:27</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p26"><em>w13 </em>7/15 p. 5</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p27"><strong>Great tribulation</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p28"><em>w13 </em>7/15 pp. 3-8</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p29"><strong>Illustration of the wheat and the weeds<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource95"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation95">Matt. 13:24-30</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p30"><em>w13 </em>7/15 pp. 13-14</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p31"><strong>Jesus comes, arrives<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource96"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation96">Matt. chaps. 24 and</a><span id="citationsource97"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation97"> 25</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p32"><em>w13 </em>7/15 pp. 7-8, 24</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p33"><strong>Jesus inspects spiritual temple 1914-1919<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource98"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation98">Mal. 3:1-4</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p34"><em>w13 </em>7/15 pp. 11-12</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p35"><strong>Meaning of name Jehovah</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p36"><em>New World Translation </em>p. 1735</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><th><p class="p37"><strong>2014</strong></p>
</th>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p38"><strong>Appointment of elders and ministerial servants</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p39"><em>w14 </em>11/15 pp. 28-29</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p40"><strong>Basis first-century Jews had for being “in expectation” of the Messiah<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource99"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation99">Luke 3:15</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p41"><em>w14 </em>2/15 pp. 26-27; <em>w14 </em>6/15 p. 22</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p42"><strong>Duration of cleansing of spiritual temple<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource100"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation100">Mal. 3:1-4</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p43"><em>w14 </em>11/15 p. 30</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p44"><strong>Marriage in the resurrection<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource101"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation101">Luke 20:34-36</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p45"><em>w14 </em>8/15 pp. 29-30</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p46"><strong>“Solid foundation of God”<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource102"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation102">2 Tim. 2:19</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p47"><em>w14 </em>7/15 pp. 8-9, 13</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p48"><strong>Two witnesses<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource103"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation103">Rev. chap. 11</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p49"><em>w14 </em>11/15 p. 30</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><th><p class="p50"><strong>2015</strong></p>
</th>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p51"><strong>Gog of Magog<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource104"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation104">Ezek. chaps. 38 and</a><span id="citationsource105"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation105"> 39</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p52"><em>w15 </em>5/15 pp. 29-30</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p53"><strong>Head covering for sister conducting a Bible study</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p54"><em>w15 </em>2/15 p. 30</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p55"><strong>Illustration of the talents<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource106"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation106">Matt. 25:14-30</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p56"><em>w15 </em>3/15 pp. 20-24</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p57"><strong>Illustration of the ten virgins<wbr /></strong>—<span id="citationsource107"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation107">Matt. 25:1-13</a></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p58"><em>w15 </em>3/15 pp. 13-16</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td><p class="p59"><strong>Types and antitypes</strong></p>
</td>
<td><p class="p60"><em>w15 </em>3/15 pp. 9-11, 17-18; <em>w15 </em>6/15 p. 32</p>
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></div>
</aside></div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation84"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource84">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Ps. 43:3)</strong> Send out your light and your truth. May these lead me; May they guide me to your holy mountain and to your grand tabernacle.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation85"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource85">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 1</span></a> <strong>(Prov. 4:18)</strong> But the path of the righteous is like the bright morning light That grows brighter and brighter until full daylight.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation86"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource86">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:44)</strong></a> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever,</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation87"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource87">^ <strong>(Gen. 49:27)</strong></a> “Benjamin will keep on tearing like a wolf. In the morning he will eat the prey, and in the evening he will divide spoil.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation88"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource88">^ <strong>(Dan. 8:23, 24)</strong></a> “And in the final part of their kingdom, as the transgressors act to a completion,* a fierce-looking king who understands ambiguous sayings* will stand up. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>His power will become great, but not through his own power. He will bring ruin in an extraordinary way,* and he will be successful and act effectively. He will bring mighty ones to ruin, also the people made up of the holy ones.</p><p></p><p>Or “have reached their limit.”</p><p>Or “who is skilled in intrigue.”</p><p>Or “bring terrible destruction.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation89"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource89">^ <strong>(Dan. 2:41-43)</strong></a> “And just as you saw the feet and the toes to be partly of clay of a potter and partly of iron, the kingdom will be divided, but some of the hardness of iron will be in it, just as you saw the iron mixed with soft clay. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>Just as you saw iron mixed with soft clay, they will be mixed with the people;* but they will not stick together, one to the other, just as iron does not mix with clay.</p><p></p><p>Or “the offspring of mankind,” that is, the common people.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation90"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource90">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:45-47)</strong></a> “Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation91"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource91">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:48-51)</strong></a> “But if ever that evil slave says in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’ <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>and he starts to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards, <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know, <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>and he will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his place with the hypocrites. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation92"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource92">^ <strong>(Mic. 5:5)</strong></a> And he will bring peace. Should the As·syrʹi·an invade our land and tread on our fortified towers, We will raise up against him seven shepherds, yes, eight princes* of mankind.</p><p></p><p>Or “leaders.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation93"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource93">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:31)</strong></a> And he will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation94"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource94">^ <strong>(Mark 13:27)</strong></a> And then he will send out the angels and will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from earth’s extremity to heaven’s extremity.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation95"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource95">^ <strong>(Matt. 13:24-30)</strong></a> He presented another illustration to them, saying: “The Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to a man who sowed fine seed in his field. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat and left. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>When the stalk sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds also appeared. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>So the slaves of the master of the house came and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it have weeds?’ <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ The slaves said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’ <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>He said, ‘No, for fear that while collecting the weeds, you uproot the wheat with them. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest season, I will tell the reapers: First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up; then gather the wheat into my storehouse.’”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation96"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource96">^ <strong>(Matt. 24:1-51)</strong></a> Now as Jesus was departing from the temple, his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>In response he said to them: “Do you not see all these things? Truly I say to you, by no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.” <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>While he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence* and of the conclusion of the system of things?”* <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads you, <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>You are going to hear of wars and reports of wars. See that you are not alarmed, for these things must take place, but the end is not yet. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>“For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>“Then people will hand you over to tribulation and will kill you, and you will be hated by all the nations on account of my name. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>Then, too, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Many false prophets will arise and mislead many; <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>and because of the increasing of lawlessness, the love of the greater number will grow cold. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>But the one who has endured* to the end will be saved. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>And this good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations, and then the end will come. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>“Therefore, when you catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken about by Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place (let the reader use discernment), <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>then let those in Ju·deʹa begin fleeing to the mountains. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house, <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>and let the man in the field not return to pick up his outer garment. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>Woe to the pregnant women and those nursing a baby in those days! <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Keep praying that your flight may not occur in wintertime nor on the Sabbath day; <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved; but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>“Then if anyone says to you, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will perform great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>Look! I have forewarned you. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>Therefore, if people say to you, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; ‘Look! He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>For just as the lightning comes out of the east and shines over to the west, so the presence* of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>“Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>Then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>And he will send out his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>“Now learn this illustration from the fig tree: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and sprouts its leaves, you know that summer is near. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>Likewise also you, when you see all these things, know that he is near at the doors. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>“Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father. <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence* of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>For as they were in those days before the Flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>and they took no note until the Flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be. <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>Then two men will be in the field; one will be taken along and the other abandoned. <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>Two women will be grinding at the hand mill; one will be taken along and the other abandoned. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>Keep on the watch, therefore, because you do not know on what day your Lord is coming. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>“But know one thing: If the householder had known in what watch* the thief was coming, he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into. <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>On this account, you too prove yourselves ready, because the Son of man is coming at an hour that you do not think to be it. <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>“Who really is the faithful and discreet* slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time? <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>Happy is that slave if his master on coming finds him doing so! <strong><sup>47 </sup></strong>Truly I say to you, he will appoint him over all his belongings. <strong><sup>48 </sup></strong>“But if ever that evil slave says in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’ <strong><sup>49 </sup></strong>and he starts to beat his fellow slaves and to eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards, <strong><sup>50 </sup></strong>the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know, <strong><sup>51 </sup></strong>and he will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his place with the hypocrites. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.</p><p></p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “the age.” See Glossary.</p><p>Or “who endures.”</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>See Glossary.</p><p>Or “at what time of night.”</p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation97"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource97">^ <strong>(Matt. 25:1-46)</strong></a> “Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’ <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’ <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave five talents* to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’ <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Well, then, you should have deposited my money* with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’ <strong><sup>31 </sup></strong>“When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne. <strong><sup>32 </sup></strong>All the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. <strong><sup>33 </sup></strong>And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left. <strong><sup>34 </sup></strong>“Then the King will say to those on his right: ‘Come, you who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>For I became hungry and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and you received me hospitably; <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>naked* and you clothed me. I fell sick and you looked after me. I was in prison and you visited me.’ <strong><sup>37 </sup></strong>Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink? <strong><sup>38 </sup></strong>When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked and clothe you? <strong><sup>39 </sup></strong>When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’ <strong><sup>40 </sup></strong>In reply the King will say to them, ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.’ <strong><sup>41 </sup></strong>“Then he will say to those on his left: ‘Go away from me, you who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. <strong><sup>42 </sup></strong>For I became hungry, but you gave me nothing to eat; and I was thirsty, but you gave me nothing to drink. <strong><sup>43 </sup></strong>I was a stranger, but you did not receive me hospitably; naked, but you did not clothe me; sick and in prison, but you did not look after me.’ <strong><sup>44 </sup></strong>Then they too will answer with the words: ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’ <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>Then he will answer them, saying: ‘Truly I say to you, to the extent that you did not do it to one of these least ones, you did not do it to me.’ <strong><sup>46 </sup></strong>These will depart into everlasting cutting-off,* but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p><p>A Greek talent equaled 20.4 kg (654 oz t). See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Or “not sufficiently dressed.”</p><p>That is, from life. Lit., “lopping off; pruning.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation98"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource98">^ <strong>(Mal. 3:1-4)</strong></a> “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up* a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“But who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye* of laundrymen. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And he will sit as a refiner and cleanser of silver and will cleanse the sons of Leʹvi; and he will clarify* them like gold and like silver, and they will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And the gift offering of Judah and of Jerusalem will actually be pleasing* to Jehovah, as in the days of long ago and as in the years of antiquity.</p><p></p><p>Or “prepare.”</p><p>Or “soap.”</p><p>Or “refine.”</p><p>Or “gratifying.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation99"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource99">^ <strong>(Luke 3:15)</strong></a> Now the people were in expectation and all of them were reasoning in their hearts about John, “May he perhaps be the Christ?”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation100"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource100">^ <strong>(Mal. 3:1-4)</strong></a> “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up* a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“But who will endure the day of his coming, and who will be able to stand when he appears? For he will be like the fire of a refiner and like the lye* of laundrymen. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>And he will sit as a refiner and cleanser of silver and will cleanse the sons of Leʹvi; and he will clarify* them like gold and like silver, and they will certainly become to Jehovah people presenting a gift offering in righteousness. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>And the gift offering of Judah and of Jerusalem will actually be pleasing* to Jehovah, as in the days of long ago and as in the years of antiquity.</p><p></p><p>Or “prepare.”</p><p>Or “soap.”</p><p>Or “refine.”</p><p>Or “gratifying.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation101"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource101">^ <strong>(Luke 20:34-36)</strong></a> Jesus said to them: “The children of this system of things* marry and are given in marriage, <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>but those who have been counted worthy of gaining that system of things and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage. <strong><sup>36 </sup></strong>In fact, neither can they die anymore, for they are like the angels, and they are God’s children by being children of the resurrection.</p><p></p><p>Or “this age.” See Glossary.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation102"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource102">^ <strong>(2 Tim. 2:19)</strong></a> Despite that, the solid foundation of God remains standing, having this seal, “Jehovah* knows those who belong to him,” and, “Let everyone calling on the name of Jehovah* renounce unrighteousness.”</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>See App. A5.</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation103"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource103">^ <strong>(Rev. 11:1-19)</strong></a> And a reed like a rod* was given to me as he said: “Get up and measure the temple sanctuary of God and the altar and those worshipping in it. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>But as for the courtyard that is outside the temple sanctuary, leave it out and do not measure it, because it has been given to the nations, and they will trample the holy city underfoot for 42 months. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I will cause my two witnesses to prophesy for 1,260 days dressed in sackcloth.” <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>These are symbolized by the two olive trees and the two lampstands and are standing before the Lord of the earth. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>If anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouths and consumes their enemies. If anyone should want to harm them, this is how he must be killed. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>These have the authority to shut up the sky* so that no rain may fall during the days of their prophesying, and they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood and to strike the earth with every sort of plague as often as they wish. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>When they have finished their witnessing, the wild beast that ascends out of the abyss will wage war with them and conquer them and kill them. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>And their corpses will be on the main street of the great city that is in a spiritual sense called Sodʹom and Egypt, where their Lord was also executed on the stake. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>And those of the peoples and tribes and tongues* and nations will look at their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not allow their corpses to be laid in a tomb. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>And those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them and celebrate, and they will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those dwelling on the earth. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>After the three and a half days, spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who saw them. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>And they heard a loud voice from heaven say to them: “Come up here.” And they went up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them.* <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>In that hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell; and 7,000 persons were killed by the earthquake, and the rest became frightened and gave glory to the God of heaven. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>The second woe is past. Look! The third woe is coming quickly. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>The seventh angel blew his trumpet. And there were loud voices in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.” <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>And the 24 elders who were seated before God on their thrones fell upon their faces and worshipped God, <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>saying: “We thank you, Jehovah* God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the nations became wrathful, and your own wrath came, and the appointed time came for the dead to be judged and to reward your slaves the prophets and the holy ones and those fearing your name, the small and the great, and to bring to ruin those ruining* the earth.” <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>And the temple sanctuary of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant was seen in his temple sanctuary. And there were flashes of lightning and voices and thunders and an earthquake and a great hail.</p><p></p><p>Or “a measuring rod.”</p><p>Or “heaven.”</p><p>Or “languages.”</p><p>Or “were looking on.”</p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “to destroy those who are destroying.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation104"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource104">^ <strong>(Ezek. 38:1-23)</strong></a> The word of Jehovah again came to me, saying: <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>“Son of man, set your face against Gog of the land of Maʹgog, the head chieftain* of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal, and prophesy against him. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>Say, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “Here I am against you, O Gog, head chieftain* of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>I will turn you around and put hooks in your jaws and bring you out with all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in splendor, a vast assembly with large shields and bucklers,* all of them wielding swords; <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Persia, E·thi·oʹpi·a, and Put are with them, all of them with buckler and helmet; <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Goʹmer and all its troops, the house of To·garʹmah from the remotest parts of the north, along with all its troops—many peoples are with you. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>“‘“Be ready, prepare yourselves, you with all your armies that are assembled with you, and you will be their commander.* <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>“‘“You will be given attention* after many days. In the final part of the years you will invade the land whose people have been restored from the ravages of the sword, collected together out of many peoples onto the mountains of Israel, which had long been lying devastated. The inhabitants of this land were restored from the peoples, and all of them dwell in security. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>You will come against them like a storm, and you will cover the land like clouds, you and all your troops and many peoples with you.”’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘In that day thoughts will come into your heart, and you will devise an evil plan. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>You will say: “I will invade the land of unprotected settlements.* I will come against those living in security, without disturbance, all of them living in settlements unprotected by walls, bars, or gates.” <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>It will be to take much spoil and plunder, to attack the devastated places that are now inhabited and a people regathered from the nations, who are accumulating wealth and property, those who are living in the center of the earth. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“‘Sheʹba and Deʹdan, the merchants of Tarʹshish and all its warriors* will say to you: “Are you invading to get much spoil and plunder? Have you assembled your armies to carry off silver and gold, to take wealth and property, to seize a very great spoil?”’ <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“So prophesy, son of man, and say to Gog, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “On that day when my people Israel are dwelling in security, will you not know it? <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>You will come from your place, from the remotest parts of the north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great assembly, a vast army. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Like clouds covering the land, you will come against my people Israel. In the final part of the days I will bring you against my land so that the nations may know me when I sanctify myself through you before their eyes, O Gog.”’ <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Are you not the same one I spoke about in the former days through my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied for many years that you would be brought against them?’ <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>“‘On that day, the day when Gog invades the land of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah, ‘my great rage will flare up. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>In my zeal, in the fire of my fury, I will speak; and in that day there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>Because of me the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, the wild beasts of the field, all the reptiles that creep on the ground, and all humans on the surface of the earth will tremble, and the mountains will be thrown down, and the cliffs will fall, and every wall will collapse to the ground.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>“‘I will call for a sword against him on all my mountains,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘Every man’s sword will be against his own brother. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>I will bring my judgment against him* with pestilence and bloodshed; and I will rain down a torrential downpour and hailstones and fire and sulfur on him and on his troops and on the many peoples with him. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>And I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.’</p><p></p><p>Or “chief prince.”</p><p>Or “chief prince.”</p><p>A small shield, often carried by archers.</p><p>Lit., “guard.”</p><p>Or “summoned.”</p><p>Or “of open, rural country.”</p><p>Or “maned young lions.”</p><p>Or “I will bring myself into judgment with him.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation105"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource105">^ <strong>(Ezek. 39:1-29)</strong></a> “And you, son of man, prophesy against Gog, and tell him, ‘This is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: “I am against you, Gog, head chieftain* of Meʹshech and Tuʹbal. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>I will turn you around and lead you and make you come up from the remotest parts of the north and bring you in upon the mountains of Israel. <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>I will knock your bow out of your left hand and make your arrows fall from your right hand. <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>On the mountains of Israel you will fall, you and all your troops and the peoples who will be with you. I will give you as food to all kinds of birds of prey and the wild beasts of the field.”’ <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>“‘You will fall on the open field, for I myself have spoken,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>“‘And I will send fire against Maʹgog and against those who are inhabiting the islands in security, and they will have to know that I am Jehovah. <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>I will make my holy name known among my people Israel, and I will not allow my holy name to be profaned any longer; and the nations will have to know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One in Israel.’ <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>“‘Yes, this is coming, and it will be done,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. ‘This is the day I have spoken about. <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The inhabitants of the cities of Israel will go out and make fires with the weapons—the bucklers* and shields, the bows and arrows, the war clubs* and lances. And they will use them to light fires for seven years. <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>They will not need to take wood from the field or gather firewood from the forests because they will use the weapons to light fires.’ “‘They will take spoil from those who despoiled them and plunder from those who had been plundering them,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>“‘On that day I will give Gog a burial place there in Israel, in the valley of those who travel east of the sea, and it will block the path of those passing through. That is where they will bury Gog and all his hordes, and they will call it the Valley of Hamon-Gog.* <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The house of Israel will spend seven months burying them in order to cleanse the land. <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>All the people of the land will work at burying them, and this will bring them fame in the day that I glorify myself,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>14 </sup></strong>“‘Men will be assigned to pass through the land constantly and bury the bodies left remaining on the surface of the earth, in order to cleanse it. They will continue the search for seven months. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>When those who pass through the land see a human bone, they will set up a marker beside it. Then those assigned to do the burying will bury it in the Valley of Hamon-Gog. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>And there will also be a city there named Ha·moʹnah.* And they will cleanse the land.’ <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>“As for you, son of man, this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘Say to every sort of bird and to all the wild beasts of the field, “Gather yourselves together and come. Gather all around my sacrifice that I am preparing for you, a great sacrifice on the mountains of Israel. You will eat flesh and drink blood. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>You will eat the flesh of mighty ones and drink the blood of the chieftains of the earth—the rams, lambs, goats, and bulls—all the fattened animals of Baʹshan. <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>You will gorge yourselves on fat and drink blood until you are drunk from the sacrifice that I prepare for you.”’ <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>“‘At my table you will be filled up with horses and charioteers, mighty ones and all sorts of warriors,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah. <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>“‘I will display my glory among the nations, and all the nations will see the judgment that I have executed and the power* that I have demonstrated among them. <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>From that day on the house of Israel will have to know that I am Jehovah their God. <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>And the nations will have to know that the house of Israel went into exile because of their own error, because they were unfaithful to me. So I hid my face from them and handed them over to their enemies, and they all fell by the sword. <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>I dealt with them according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and I hid my face from them.’ <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>“Therefore this is what the Sovereign Lord Jehovah says: ‘I will restore the captives of Jacob and have mercy on the whole house of Israel; and I will zealously defend* my holy name. <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>After they have been humiliated for all their unfaithfulness toward me, they will dwell securely on their land, with no one to make them afraid. <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>When I bring them back from the peoples and collect them together from the lands of their enemies, I will also sanctify myself among them before the eyes of many nations.’ <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘They will have to know that I am Jehovah their God when I send them into exile among the nations and then gather them back to their land, not leaving any of them behind. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>I will not hide my face from them any longer, for I will pour out my spirit on the house of Israel,’ declares the Sovereign Lord Jehovah.”</p><p></p><p>Or “chief prince.”</p><p>A small shield, often carried by archers.</p><p>Or possibly, “handpikes,” a weapon with a pointed tip.</p><p>Or “the Valley of Gog’s Hordes.”</p><p>Meaning “Hordes.”</p><p>Lit., “hand.”</p><p>Lit., “show exclusive devotion for.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation106"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource106">^ <strong>(Matt. 25:14-30)</strong></a> “For it is just like a man about to travel abroad who summoned his slaves and entrusted his belongings to them. <strong><sup>15 </sup></strong>He gave five talents* to one, two to another, and one to still another, to each according to his own ability, and he went abroad. <strong><sup>16 </sup></strong>Immediately the one who received the five talents went and did business with them and gained five more. <strong><sup>17 </sup></strong>Likewise, the one who received the two gained two more. <strong><sup>18 </sup></strong>But the slave who received just one went off and dug in the ground and hid his master’s money.* <strong><sup>19 </sup></strong>“After a long time, the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. <strong><sup>20 </sup></strong>So the one who had received the five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted five talents to me; see, I gained five talents more.’ <strong><sup>21 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>22 </sup></strong>Next the one who had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you entrusted two talents to me; see, I gained two talents more.’ <strong><sup>23 </sup></strong>His master said to him: ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’ <strong><sup>24 </sup></strong>“Finally the slave who had received the one talent came forward and said: ‘Master, I knew you to be a demanding man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow. <strong><sup>25 </sup></strong>So I grew afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, you have what is yours.’ <strong><sup>26 </sup></strong>In reply his master said to him: ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow? <strong><sup>27 </sup></strong>Well, then, you should have deposited my money* with the bankers, and on my coming I would have received it back with interest. <strong><sup>28 </sup></strong>“‘Therefore, take the talent away from him and give it to the one who has the ten talents. <strong><sup>29 </sup></strong>For to everyone who has, more will be given, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him. <strong><sup>30 </sup></strong>And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where his weeping and the gnashing of his teeth will be.’</p><p></p><p>A Greek talent equaled 20.4 kg (654 oz t). See App. B14.</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p><p>Lit., “silver.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation107"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource107">^ <strong>(Matt. 25:1-13)</strong></a> “Then the Kingdom of the heavens may be likened to ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. <strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.* <strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them, <strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>whereas the discreet took oil in their flasks along with their lamps. <strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>While the bridegroom was delaying, they all became drowsy and fell asleep. <strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Right in the middle of the night there was a shout: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Go out to meet him.’ <strong><sup>7 </sup></strong>Then all those virgins got up and put their lamps in order. <strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of your oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’ <strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>The discreet answered, saying: ‘Perhaps there may not be enough for both us and you. Go instead to those who sell it, and buy some for yourselves.’ <strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>While they were going off to buy it, the bridegroom came. The virgins who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut. <strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Afterward, the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, Sir, open to us!’ <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>In answer he said, ‘I tell you the truth, I do not know you.’ <strong><sup>13 </sup></strong>“Keep on the watch, therefore, because you know neither the day nor the hour.</p><p></p><p>Or “wise.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource10">^ <span id="pcitation10"></span><strong>***kr pp. 13-16 The Kingdom Is Born in Heaven***</strong></a></p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<p class="qu"><strong>1, 2. </strong>What was the greatest event ever to occur in world history, and why is it not surprising that it went unseen by human eyes?</p>
<p class="p5">DO YOU ever wonder what it might have been like to live during some great turning point in history? Many do. But consider: If you had lived in such a momentous time, would you have personally witnessed the key events that brought about change? Perhaps not. Events that spell doom for old regimes and fill the pages of history books often take place out of the public eye. In a sense, much of history unfolds behind closed doors<wbr />—in throne rooms, in private council chambers, or in government offices. Nonetheless, such changes affect millions of lives.</p>
<p class="p6"><strong><sup>2 </sup></strong>What about the greatest event ever to occur in the history of the world? That event has touched millions of lives. Yet, it took place out of human view. We refer, of course, to the birth in heaven of God’s Kingdom, the long-promised Messianic government that will soon bring this whole world system to its end. <strong>(Read </strong><span id="citationsource108"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation108"><strong>Daniel 2:34, 35,</strong></a><span id="citationsource109"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation109"> <strong>44, 45</strong></a><strong>.) </strong>Since humans did not witness that momentous birth, should we conclude that Jehovah hid the event from mankind? Or, rather, did he prepare his loyal people for it beforehand? Let us see.</p>
<h2><strong>“My Messenger . . . Will Clear Up a Way Before Me”</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>3-5. </strong>(a) Who was “the messenger of the covenant” mentioned at <span id="citationsource110"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation110">Malachi 3:1</a>? (b) What would happen before “the messenger of the covenant” would come to the temple?</p>
<p class="p8"><strong><sup>3 </sup></strong>From ancient times, Jehovah purposed to prepare his people for the birth of the Messianic Kingdom. For instance, consider the prophecy of <span id="citationsource111"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation111">Malachi 3:1</a>: “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight.”</p>
<p class="p9"><strong><sup>4 </sup></strong>In the modern-day fulfillment, when did Jehovah, “the true Lord,” come to inspect those who were serving in the earthly courtyard of his spiritual temple? The prophecy explains that Jehovah would come with “the messenger of the covenant.” Who was that? None other than the Messianic King, Jesus Christ! (<span id="citationsource112"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation112">Luke 1:68-73</a>) As the newly installed Ruler, he would inspect and refine God’s people on earth.<wbr />—<span id="citationsource113"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation113">1 Pet. 4:17</a>.</p>
<p class="p10"><strong><sup>5 </sup></strong>Who, though, was the other “messenger,” the first one mentioned at <span id="citationsource114"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation114">Malachi 3:1</a>? This prophetic figure would be on the scene well before the Messianic King’s presence. In the decades before 1914, did anyone “clear up a way” before the Messianic King?</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>6. </strong>Who acted as the foretold “messenger” that came first to prepare God’s people for the events ahead?</p>
<p class="p11"><strong><sup>6 </sup></strong>Throughout this publication, we will find answers to such questions in the thrilling history of Jehovah’s modern-day people. This history shows that in the latter part of the 19th century, one small group of faithful people was emerging as the only body of genuine Christians in a vast field of imitations. That group came to be known as the Bible Students. Those taking the lead among them<wbr />—Charles T. Russell and his close associates—<wbr />did, indeed, act as the foretold “messenger,” giving spiritual direction to God’s people and preparing them for the events ahead. Let us consider four ways in which the “messenger” did so.</p>
<h2><strong>Worshipping in Truth</strong></h2>
<p class="qu"><strong>7, 8. </strong>(a) During the 1800’s, who began to expose the falseness of the immortality of the soul doctrine? (b) C. T. Russell and his close associates exposed what other teachings as false?</p>
<p class="p13"><strong><sup>7 </sup>Those Bible Students studied prayerfully; they agreed on, collected together, and published clear doctrinal truths. </strong>For centuries, the world of Christendom had been enveloped in spiritual darkness; many of its teachings were rooted in paganism. A prime example is the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. During the 1800’s, though, a few sincere students of the Bible scrutinized that teaching and saw that it had no support in God’s Word. Henry Grew, George Stetson, and George Storrs wrote and lectured boldly, exposing that satanic lie.<span id="footnotesource1"></span><a href="#footnote1">*</a> Their work, in turn, had a profound impact on C. T. Russell and his close associates.</p>
<p class="p14"><strong><sup>8 </sup></strong>The little group of Bible Students found that other doctrines linked to the immortality of the soul were likewise confusing and false<wbr />—for example, the teaching that all good people go to heaven or that God torments the immortal souls of the wicked in eternal hellfire. Russell and his close associates boldly exposed those lies in numerous articles, books, pamphlets, tracts, and published sermons.</p>
<p class="qu"> <strong>9. </strong>How did <em>Zion’s Watch Tower </em>expose as false the Trinity doctrine?</p>
<p class="p15"><strong><sup>9 </sup></strong>Likewise, the Bible Students exposed as false the widely revered Trinity doctrine. In 1887, <em>Zion’s Watch Tower </em>remarked: “The Scriptures are very clear concerning the distinct individuality and exact relationship of Jehovah and our Lord Jesus.” The article then noted how amazing it was that “the idea of a triune God<wbr />—three Gods in one, and at the same time, one God in three—<wbr />should ever have gained prominence and general acceptance. But the fact that it is so, only goes to show how soundly the church slept while the enemy bound her in the chains of error.”</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>10. </strong>How did the <em>Watch Tower </em>point to 1914 as a marked year?</p>
<p class="p16"><strong><sup>10 </sup></strong>As its full title suggested, the journal <em>Zion’s Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence </em>was deeply concerned with prophecies pertaining to Christ’s presence. The faithful anointed writers who contributed to that journal saw that Daniel’s prophecy regarding the “seven times” had a bearing on the timing of the fulfillment of God’s purposes regarding the Messianic Kingdom. As early as the 1870’s, they pointed to 1914 as the year when those seven times would end. (<span id="citationsource115"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation115">Dan. 4:25;</a><span id="citationsource116"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation116"> Luke 21:24</a>) Although our brothers of that era did not yet grasp the full significance of that marked year, they proclaimed what they knew far and wide, with long-lasting effects.</p>
<p class="qu"><strong>11, 12. </strong>(a) To whom did Brother Russell give credit for what he taught? (b) How important was the work carried out by Russell and his associates in the decades prior to 1914?</p>
<p class="p17"><strong><sup>11 </sup></strong>Neither Russell nor his faithful associates claimed credit for uncovering and grasping those vital spiritual truths. Russell gave much credit to others who had come before him. Above all, he gave credit to Jehovah God, the one responsible for teaching His people what they need to know when they need to know it. Clearly, Jehovah did bless the efforts of Russell and his associates to sift out truth from falsehood. As the years passed, they stood ever more apart and distinct from Christendom.</p>
<p class="p18"><strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The work those faithful men did in championing doctrinal truth in the decades before 1914 was simply amazing! Looking back, <em>The Watch Tower and Herald of Christ’s Presence </em>of November 1, 1917, commented: “Millions of people today find themselves free from the burden of fear, imposed upon them by the teachings of hell fire and other false doctrines . . . The tide of Truth, which began more than forty years ago, is still steadily rising and will continue to rise until it fills the whole earth; and its opponents might as well try to sweep back with an ordinary broom the waves of a mighty ocean as to prevent the Truth from spreading throughout the earth.”</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation108"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource108">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 2:34, 35)</strong> You looked on until a stone was cut out, not by hands, and it struck the image on its feet of iron and of clay and crushed them. <strong><sup>35 </sup></strong>At that time the iron, the clay, the copper, the silver, and the gold were, all together, crushed and became like the chaff from the summer threshing floor, and the wind carried them away so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a large mountain, and it filled the whole earth.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation109"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource109">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 2</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 2:44, 45)</strong> “In the days of those kings the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed. And this kingdom will not be passed on to any other people. It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it alone will stand forever, <strong><sup>45 </sup></strong>just as you saw that out of the mountain a stone was cut not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the copper, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The Grand God has made known to the king what will happen in the future. The dream is true, and its interpretation is trustworthy.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation110"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource110">^ <strong>(Mal. 3:1)</strong></a> “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up* a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies.</p><p></p><p>Or “prepare.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation111"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource111">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 3</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:1)</strong> “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up* a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies.</p><p></p><p>Or “prepare.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation112"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource112">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(Luke 1:68-73)</strong> “Let Jehovah* be praised, the God of Israel, because he has turned his attention to his people and has brought them deliverance. <strong><sup>69 </sup></strong>And he has raised up a horn of salvation* for us in the house of David his servant, <strong><sup>70 </sup></strong>just as he has spoken through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old, <strong><sup>71 </sup></strong>of a salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all those hating us; <strong><sup>72 </sup></strong>to show mercy in connection with our forefathers and to call to mind his holy covenant, <strong><sup>73 </sup></strong>the oath that he swore to Abraham our forefather,</p><p></p><p>See App. A5.</p><p>Or “a powerful savior.” See Glossary, “Horn.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation113"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource113">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 4</span></a> <strong>(1 Pet. 4:17)</strong> For it is the appointed time for the judgment to start with the house of God. Now if it starts first with us, what will the outcome be for those who are not obedient to the good news of God?</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation114"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource114">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 5</span></a> <strong>(Mal. 3:1)</strong> “Look! I am sending my messenger, and he will clear up* a way before me. And suddenly the true Lord, whom you are seeking, will come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant will come, in whom you take delight. Look! He will certainly come,” says Jehovah of armies.</p><p></p><p>Or “prepare.”</p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation115"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource115">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Dan. 4:25)</strong> You will be driven away from among men, and your dwelling will be with the beasts of the field, and you will be given vegetation to eat just like bulls; and you will become wet with the dew of the heavens, and seven times will pass over you, until you know that the Most High is Ruler in the kingdom of mankind and that he grants it to whomever he wants.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation116"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource116">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 10</span></a> <strong>(Luke 21:24)</strong> And they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations* until the appointed times of the nations* are fulfilled.</p><p></p><p>Or “Gentiles.”</p><p>Or “Gentiles.”</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
<div class="groupFootnote"><div id="footnote1"><p><a href="#footnotesource1">^ <span class="footnoteref">par. 7</span></a> To learn more about Grew, Stetson, and Storrs, see the book <em>Jehovah’s Witnesses<wbr />—Proclaimers of God’s Kingdom, </em>pages 45-46.</p></div>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
</div>
</div>
<div class="extPubRef"><p><a href="202016363.xhtml#pcitationsource11">^ <span id="pcitation11"></span><strong>***snnw song 143 Light in a Darkened World***</strong></a></p>
<header>
<p class="contextTtl">Song 143</p>
<h1><strong>Light in a Darkened World</strong></h1>
</header>
<p class="p3"><strong>Download:</strong></p>
<ul><li><p class="p4">  Lyrics Only</p>
</li>
<li><p class="p5">  Lead Sheet</p>
</li>
</ul>
<p class = "themeScrp">(<span id="citationsource117"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation117">2 Corinthians 4:6</a>)</p>
<div class="bodyTxt">
<ol><li><p class="p7">             In these days, dark and lawless days,</p>
<p class="p8">Shines a light we can see.</p>
<p class="p9">Like the dawn of another day</p>
<p class="p10">That will soon come to be.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p11">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p12">Shining through the darkness,</p>
<p class="p13">Ours is a message so bright.</p>
<p class="p14">It offers hope and light—</p>
<p class="p15">Sparkling like the daylight,</p>
<p class="p16">Bringing tomorrow in sight—</p>
<p class="p17">So ends the night.</p>
</div>
</li>
<li><p class="p18">             Those who sleep need awakening</p>
<p class="p19">As the time ebbs away.</p>
<p class="p20">We give hope and encouragement.</p>
<p class="p21">For their future we’ll pray.</p>
<div class="chorus"><p class="p22">(CHORUS)</p>
<p class="p23">Shining through the darkness,</p>
<p class="p24">Ours is a message so bright.</p>
<p class="p25">It offers hope and light—</p>
<p class="p26">Sparkling like the daylight,</p>
<p class="p27">Bringing tomorrow in sight—</p>
<p class="p28">So ends the night.</p>
</div>
</li>
</ol>
</div>
<div class="closingContent"><p class="p29">(See also <span id="citationsource118"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation118">John 3:19;</a><span id="citationsource119"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation119"> 8:12;</a><span id="citationsource120"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation120"> Rom. 13:11, 12;</a><span id="citationsource121"></span><a epub:type="noteref" href="#citation121"> 1 Pet. 2:9</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="groupExt">
<div class="groupExtScrpCite">
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation117"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource117">^ <strong>(2 Cor. 4:6)</strong></a> For God is the one who said: “Let the light shine out of darkness,” and he has shone on our hearts to illuminate them with the glorious knowledge of God by the face of Christ.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation118"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource118">^ <strong>(John 3:19)</strong></a> Now this is the basis for judgment: that the light has come into the world, but men have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation119"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource119">^ <strong>(John 8:12)</strong></a> Then Jesus spoke again to them, saying: “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will by no means walk in darkness, but will possess the light of life.”</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation120"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource120">^ <strong>(Rom. 13:11, 12)</strong></a> And do this because you know the season, that it is already the hour for you to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers. <strong><sup>12 </sup></strong>The night is well along; the day has drawn near. Let us therefore throw off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light.</p><p></p></div></aside>
<aside epub:type="footnote"><div epub:type="footnote" class="extScrpCite" id="citation121"><p class="extScrpCiteTxt"><a href="#citationsource121">^ <strong>(1 Pet. 2:9)</strong></a> But you are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies”* of the One who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.</p><p></p><p>Lit., “the virtues,” that is, his praiseworthy qualities and deeds.</p></div></aside>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
